i
Header Here
2024-2025
GRADUATE 
CATALOG
ii
1
Header Here
Gannon University
Graduate Catalog
2024 – 2025
Since 1964 Gannon has provided graduate-level course work for the Erie community, the tri-state region, and beyond. 
We pride ourselves on the resulting professional accomplishments of our 10,214 master’s degree and 415 doctoral 
alumni, included among them are presidents of over 70 organizations, vice presidents, controllers, executive directors, 
officers, principals, superintendents, and upper-level managers in 350 organizations worldwide. Many of our graduate 
school alumni have received the Ph.D. degree.
Our urban location provides both support to the regional professional communities and a significant source of hands-on 
experience for graduate studies. Over the years Gannon students have had many enriching opportunities to do projects, 
consult, complete internships, and otherwise involve themselves in the business, health care, human service, educational, 
and government communities at our doorstep. Additionally, representatives of these professions visit the Gannon campus 
regularly to supplement classroom theory via guest lectures, seminars, workshops, and adjunct teaching.
Office of Graduate Admissions – Erie Campus
Courthouse Commons
109 University Square
Erie, PA 16541-0001
Office of Graduate Admissions – Ruskin Campus
105 Commercial Center Drive
Ruskin, FL 33573
Phone (814) 871-7474 or  
Toll Free 1-800-GANNON-U  
FAX (814) 871-5827
E-mail: graduate@gannon.edu
University Mission Statement
Gannon is a Catholic, Diocesan university dedicated to excellence in teaching, scholarship, and service. Our faculty and 
staff prepare students to be global citizens through programs grounded in the liberal arts and sciences and professional 
specializations. Inspired by the Catholic Intellectual Tradition, we offer a comprehensive, values-centered learning 
experience that emphasizes faith, leadership, inclusiveness, and social responsibility.
2
Academic Accreditation 
Based on accepted qualitative and quantitative standards of 
excellence for evaluating the quality of education offered at the 
institution. Evaluation and subsequent accreditation include such 
areas as the educational objectives and achievements, academic 
programs, admissions practices, student personnel and welfare 
services, institutional study, training and experience of instructional 
staff, financial stability, and laboratory and library resources.
Gannon University Graduate Programs  
are accredited by:
The Middle States Commission on Higher Education 
1007 North Orange Street, 4th Floor, MB #166, Wilmington, DE 19801
(267)-284-5000, FAX (215) 662–5501, www.msche.org
The Middle States Commission on Higher Education is an institutional 
accrediting agency recognized by the U.S. Secretary of Education
and the Council for Higher Education Accreditation.
Pennsylvania Department of Education
333 Market Street, Harrisburg, PA 17126-0333
(717) 787-5041 FAX (717) 783-0583
Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs 
11520 West 119th St., Overland Park, KS 66211
(913) 339-9356, FAX (913) 339-6226, www.acbsp.org
Accreditation Council for Occupational Therapy Education
7501 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 510E, Bethesda, MD 20814
(301) 652-6611, www.acoteonline.org
Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the Physician Assistant, Inc.
12000 Findley Road, Suite 275, Johns Creek, GA 30097
(770) 476-1224, FAX (770) 476-1738, www.arc-pa.org
Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs 
9355 113th Street N, #7709, Seminole, FL 33775
(727) 210-2350, FAX (727) 210-2354, www.caahep.org
Commission on Accreditation of Athletic Training Education 
2001 K Street NW, 3rd Floor North, Washington, DC 20006
(512) 733-9700, www.caate.net
Commission on Accreditation in Physical Therapy Education 
3030 Potomac Avenue, Suite 100, Alexandria, VA 22305
(703) 684-2782 FAX (703) 684-7343, www.capteonline.org
Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education 
655 K Street, NW Suite 750, Washington, DC 20001
(202) 887-6791, FAX (202) 887-8476, www.aacnnursing.org/CCNE
Committee on Accreditation for the Exercise Sciences
401 W. Michigan Street, Indianapolis, IN 46202
(317)777-1135, FAX (317)634-7817, www.coaes.org
Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs 
1001 North Fairfax Street, Suite 510, Alexandria, VA 22314
(703) 535-5990, FAX (703) 739-6209, www.cacrep.org
Council on Academic Accreditation in Audiology  
and Speech-Language Pathology (Ruskin)
200 Research Blvd., #310, Rockville, MD 20850
(800) 498-2071, www.caa.asha.org
Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Educational Programs 
222 South Prospect Avenue, Suite 304, Park Ridge, IL 60068-4010 
(847) 692-7050, FAX (847) 692-7137, www.coacrna.org
Gannon University holds membership in:
American Association of Colleges of Nursing
655 K Street NW, Suite 750, Washington, DC 20001
(202) 463-6930, FAX (202) 785-8320, www.aacnnursing.org
American Association of Colleges for Teacher Education
1307 New York Avenue NW, Suite 300, Washington, DC 20005-4701 
(202) 293-2450, FAX (202) 457-8095, www.AACTE.org
American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business 
600 Emerson Road, Suite 300, St. Louis, MO 63141-6762
(314) 872-8481, FAX (314) 872-8495
American Council on Education
One Dupont Circle, NW, Suite 800, Washington, DC 20036 
(202) 939-9300, FAX (202) 833-4760, www.acenet.edu
Association of Independent Colleges and Universities of Pennsylvania 
800 North Third Street, Suite 502, Harrisburg, PA 17102
(717) 232-8649, FAX (717) 231-4053
Association of Schools Advancing Health Professions
112 C Street NW, Suite 200, Washington, DC 20001
(202) 237-6481, www.asahp.org
The Board of Law Examiners of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania 
5035 Ritter Road, Suite 1100, Mechanicsburg, PA 17055
(717) 795-7270
College Entrance Examination Board (The College Board) 
45 Columbus Ave, New York, NY 10023-6992
(212) 713-8000
Council of Colleges of Arts and Sciences (c/o The College of William and Mary) 
P.O. Box 8795, Williamsburg, VA 23187-8795
(757) 221-1784; FAX (757) 221-1776, www.ccas.net
The Council of Independent Colleges 
One Dupont Circle, Suite 320 Washington, DC 20036
(202) 466-7230, www.cic.org
Middle Atlantic Association of Colleges of Business Administration 
La Salle University, 1900 W. Olney Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19141
(215) 951-1040
Pennsylvania Association of Colleges and Teacher Educators 
1201 Northwestern Drive, Monroeville, PA 15146
(412) 373-9185
Pennsylvania Association of Colleges and Universities 
800 North 3rd Street, Harrisburg, PA 17102
(717) 232-4446 or (717) 232-8639
Pennsylvania Association of Graduate Schools 
President, James F. Matta,
Assistant Vice President for Graduate Studies and Research, 
Bloomsburg University, 400 E. Second Street, Bloomsburg, PA 17815
(570) 389-4015, jmatta@bloomu.edu
State Education Department of New York
Cultural Education Center, Room 5A-11, Albany, NY 12230
(518) 474-3901, FAX (518) 473-0271, www.nysed.gov/tert/homepage.com
Gannon University is approved by:
State Board of Nursing of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
P.O. Box 2649, Harrisburg, PA 17105-2649
(833) 367-2762, FAX (717) 783-0822
3
Table of Contents
Advocate for Campus Accessibility
Lisa Laird is the 504/ADA coordinator supporting students with 
disabilities who require accommodations with facilities, academics, 
or services at the University. Students seeking information or 
assistance in any matter regarding accessibility or accommodations 
should contact her upon admission to the University: Lisa Laird, 
Gannon University, 109 University Square, Erie, PA 16541, 814-
871-5522, or laird004@gannon.edu.
Gannon University is dedicated to excellence in holistic education. 
In 1933, Archbishop John Mark Gannon established Cathedral 
College, a two-year institution for men which by 1941 had evolved 
into a four-year college, the Gannon School of Arts and Sciences. 
The name Gannon College was adopted in 1944, and Gannon 
achieved university status in 1979. Then, in 1989, the delivery 
of higher education was further enhanced as Villa Maria College, 
founded in 1925, became part of the University community.
Today, Gannon University is a co-educational institution with 1,245 
graduate students among a total student body of 4,343 enrolled full 
and part-time in a variety of graduate, undergraduate and associate 
degree programs.
Key to Gannon’s mission is the personal and professional develop-
ment of its students. A range of campus organizations and activities 
enhance academic interests, as well as foster leadership, volunteer-
ism, and community service. The University community provides 
numerous opportunities for intellectual, moral, and spiritual growth.
Gannon University Policy of Equal Opportunity
It is the policy of Gannon University to affirmatively implement 
equal opportunity to all qualified applicants and existing students 
and employees. In administering its affairs, the University shall 
not discriminate against any person on any basis prohibited by 
law. All aspects of employment including recruitment, selection, 
hiring, training, transfer, promotion, termination, compensation 
and benefits shall conform to this policy. All aspects of student 
affairs and education of students including recruitment, admissions, 
financial aid, placement, access to facilities, student discipline, 
student life and student employment conform to this policy. 
Furthermore, Gannon University does not discriminate based on 
sex in its education programs and activities.
Gannon University will protect the rights of all students and 
employees to work and study free from harassment, including 
sexual harassment and/or sexual violence. Inquiries concerning 
the application of Title IX and other non-discrimination policies 
are to be referred to the Gannon University Title IX Coordinator, 
Joseph P. Primiano, Beyer Hall Suite 306, 109 University Square, 
Erie, PA 16541-0001; 814-871-7224; primiano001@gannon.edu 
or TitleIX@gannon.edu.
Table of Contents
Graduate Study at Gannon........................................................5
Programs of Study......................................................................6
	
Doctoral Programs
	
Master’s Degree Programs
	
Graduate Level Certificates
	
Coursework for Professional Development
Admission....................................................................................7
Global Students...........................................................................8
Tuition and Fees........................................................................10
	
Semester Payment Plan..........................................................11
	
Company/School District Reimbursements...........................11
Financial Aid.............................................................................11
	
Federal Direct Student Loan (FDSL).....................................11
	
Graduate Student Incentive Awards.......................................12
	
Grant for Diocesan Employees..............................................12
	
Career Exploration and Development....................................13
	
Assistantships.........................................................................13
Academic Regulations..............................................................18
The Library...............................................................................24
Academic Computing...............................................................25
Graduate Programs, Departments and Courses
Anti-Money Laundering Certificate – Online.............................26
Applied Exercise Physiology......................................................27
Athletic Training (MAT).............................................................31
Biomedical Engineering..............................................................39
Business Administration (MBA)................................................42
Business Analytics......................................................................45
Business Essentials Certificate (Online).....................................50
Clinical Mental Health Counseling (MS) ..................................52
Computer and Information Science (MSCIS) ............................56	
Criminalistics (MSC)..................................................................67
Education ...................................................................................70	
Engineering.................................................................................87	
Electrical Engineering (MSEE)..................................................87	
Embedded Software Engineering (MSES).................................87
	
Engineering Management (MSEM).......................................97
	
Mechanical Engineering (MSME).........................................99
Environmental Science and Management (MSEH)..................105
Healthcare Administration (MHA)...........................................110
Healthcare Business Analytics Certificate – Online.................113
Information Assurance and Cybersecurity................................115
Nursing (BSN-DNP) Anesthesia...............................................126
Nursing (MSN).........................................................................120
Nursing Practice (DNP) ...........................................................131
Occupational Therapy (MS).....................................................133
Post-Professional Occupational Therapy Doctorate (OTD) ....140
Physical Therapy (DPT)...........................................................143
Physician Assistant (MPAS) ....................................................153
Public Administration (MPA)...................................................159
Speech and Language Pathology (MS).....................................163
Strategic Communication (MA)...............................................174
Board of Trustees....................................................................177
Administration........................................................................178
Faculty......................................................................................178
4
The Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) Office
The Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) Office provides resourc-
es, programming, and support focused on Gannon University’s 
mission driven commitment to inclusion. With an emphasis on 
respect of individuality, shared connectedness, and multicultur-
alism, the DEI Office seeks to cultivate an enriched environment 
where all students, faculty, and staff of the Gannon community 
are welcomed and valued with dignity and belonging irrespective 
of race, gender, ability, religious practice, ethnicity, identity, or 
socioeconomic factors. The DEI Office spearheads and leads ini-
tiatives that inspire social awareness, appreciation for diversity, and 
cultural consciousness. In addition, the DEI Office also supports the 
creation and delivery of designated recommendations formulated 
through the Justice Equity Diversity and Inclusion (JEDI) Steering 
Committee, which focuses on university-wide strategies. 
Student Accountability and Prevention Education  
(Student Conduct)
Gannon University is a Catholic Diocesan institution that is com-
mitted to promoting an environment that is conducive to learning, 
living, and engaging in student life. The University student ac-
countability process is designed to be both educational and devel-
opmental. This process must balance the wellbeing of the individual 
while also balancing the wellbeing of the entire campus community.
Each student is a member of the Gannon Community. All members 
of the community are expected to abide by the standards set forth 
based on the University’s shared values rooted in the Catholic 
tradition. Students are responsible for their own behavior, and 
when reasonable the behavior of their guests and other members 
of the community.
The student accountability process is an educational process and is 
different from criminal or civil court proceedings. In the account-
ability process students may be found responsible for violations 
of policy if they are found more likely than not to have violated 
a policy.
Title IX 
Faithful to its mission as an educational community and Catholic 
University, Gannon University (hereinafter referred to as “Univer-
sity’’) affirms and promotes the fundamental dignity and respect 
accorded to all people by virtue of their common humanity. Both 
Scripture and Christian tradition affirm this, beginning with the 
book of Genesis: “In the divine image male and female God created 
them’’ (Genesis 1:27). Sexual misconduct violates this basic right 
of each individual to be treated as a person worthy of respect and 
is in direct contradiction with the University’s Mission. 
The University is committed to maintaining a safe environment 
free from sexual misconduct/discrimination and, therefore, will 
not tolerate sexual misconduct of any kind. In an ongoing effort 
to prevent and address sexual misconduct, the University provides 
education and prevention programs, investigates complaints of 
sexual misconduct and dispenses corrective or disciplinary action 
where appropriate. The University will also provide remedies and 
information about resources, including how to obtain counseling 
and medical care and pursue criminal and University disciplinary 
actions. Remedies include interim measures, informal, or formal 
procedures as described below.
Behaviors that contribute to or constitute sexual misconduct have 
no place at Gannon University, where people are expected to learn 
and develop to their full potential. Through the sexual misconduct 
policy and protocol, the University seeks to provide an adequate, 
reliable and impartial response in a caring manner when these 
behaviors occur within the University community. Support and 
information will be available to assist students in making decisions 
throughout the reporting and investigating process. This policy 
applies to student behavior whether on or off campus, as it affects 
all University students.
All students, faculty and staff, as well as members of the public par-
ticipating in University activities, have the right to an environment 
free from sexual misconduct. Violence, abuse, intimidation and/or 
retaliation directed toward another person violate the University’s 
Code of Conduct and Pennsylvania State laws. Members of the 
University community are expected to comply with University 
policies and guidelines in addition to federal, state and local laws 
whether on or off campus.
Gannon University’s current Title IX policy can be accessed at
https://www.gannon.edu/about-gannon/title-ix/ 
Inquiries concerning Title IX are to be referred to the Gannon Uni-
versity Title IX Coordinator, Joseph P. Primiano, Beyer Hall Suite 
306, 109 University Square, Erie, PA 16541-0001; 814-871-7224; 
primiano001@gannon.edu or TitleIX@gannon.edu.
5
Graduate Study at Gannon
Graduate Study 
at Gannon
Gannon first offered graduate course work in 1964 and the first 
master’s degrees were awarded in 1966. From a small beginning 
with fewer than 50 students enrolled in English and Education 
master’s degree programs, graduate offerings grew dramatically 
in the late 60’s and early 70’s with the introduction of Counseling 
Psychology, Engineering, Public Administration, Nursing, and 
the tri-state area’s first MBA program. Growth and development 
continued with the addition of a number of certificate programs 
in the late 70’s and 80’s. In recent years, Gannon has continued to 
add new graduate programs in targeted areas including Strategic 
Communication, Healthcare Administration, Information 
Assurance and Cybersecurity, Anti-Money Laundering, and more.
In the Summer of 2015, Gannon University introduced an additional 
campus in Ruskin, Florida. The Morosky College of Health 
Professions and Sciences currently offers Occupational Therapy 
Doctorate, Doctor of Physical Therapy, Master of Physician 
Assistant Science, and Master of Science in Speech Language 
Pathology programs.
Perhaps the single most distinguishing characteristic of Gannon is 
that it is a Catholic university. This means that academic focus is 
placed upon the quality and dignity of human life. We treasure each 
individual graduate student and strive to provide the highest level 
of professional and academic training within a context of growth 
and supportiveness. Graduate students, both full and part-time, are 
valued members of the University community. They are encouraged 
to participate in the many cultural, social, recreational, and athletic 
activities of Gannon.
Statement of Principles of Good Practice
Gannon University subscribes to the National Association for 
College Admission Counseling’s Statement of Principles of Good 
Practice. Admission policy has been established to protect all 
students’ rights, privileges and privacy, while providing well-
qualified students with an opportunity to enroll at the University. 
Gannon University reserves the right to deny admission to 
applicants who have a criminal record or other indications that 
they could harm or impact the wellness of the Gannon Community.
Graduate Studies Mission Statement 
The mission of graduate education at Gannon University is to 
provide distinctive and rigorous programs in diverse disciplines 
for students who are seeking to: advance their knowledge and 
attain mastery in their profession; engage with the faculty in the 
integration of scholarship, research, and professional practice; and 
succeed as critical thinkers and decision makers and as contributing 
leaders of their professions in a global society. 
Graduate Studies Vision Statement
Graduate programs at Gannon University will be recognized for 
their academic excellence and their innovative pedagogies. Our 
programs will produce life-long learners who successfully compete 
in their respective careers, provide ethical leadership, and serve 
their communities. Graduate education will be acknowledged and 
supported as central to Gannon’s continued growth and innovative, 
entrepreneurial spirit.
Graduate Studies Learning Outcomes 
By graduation, all Gannon University graduate students will have 
demonstrated:
1.	 Advanced knowledge and skills appropriate to the discipline.
2.	 Knowledge or application of ethical standards within the 
	
discipline.
3. 	Professional communication proficiencies and disseminated
 	 information appropriate to the discipline.
4.	 Contributions, such as service, to the profession and/or
	
community.
The University reserves the right to make any changes in the 
contents of this catalog or in the documented course of study that 
it deems necessary or desirable. When changes are made they will 
be communicated to the appropriate students.
6
Programs of Study
Gannon offers four different levels of graduate programs:
(1) Doctoral programs, (2) Master’s degrees with concentrations,
(3) graduate level certificates and (4) select course work for pro-
fessional development.
Doctoral Programs
•   Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP)
	
–  Nurse Anesthesia
	
–  Post-Master’s Doctor of Nursing Practice
•   Occupational Therapy (OTD)
•   Physical Therapy (DPT)
•   Post Professional Occupational Therapy (OTD)
Master’s Degree Programs
The following areas of study lead to master’s degrees. Concentration 
areas are listed under degree programs where applicable.
•   Applied Exercise Physiology (Master of Science – MS)
•   Athletic Training (Master of Athletic Training – MAT)
•   Biomedical Engineering (MSBME)
•   Business Administration (Master of Business 
Administration– MBA)
•   Business Analytics (Master of Business Administration 
in Business Analytics)
•   Clinical Mental Health Counseling (Master of Science – MS)
•   Computer and Information Science (Master of Science – 
MSCIS)
	
–  Data Science
	
–  Information Technology
	
–  Software Engineering
•   Criminalistics (Master of Science in Criminalistics – MSC)
•   Education (Master of Education – MEd)
	
–  Curriculum and Instruction
	
–  Reading
•   Electrical Engineering (Master of Science in Electrical 
Engineering – MSEE)
•   Embedded Software Engineering (Master of Science in 
Embedded Software Engineering – MSES)
•   Engineering Management (Master of Science in Engineering 
Management – MSEM)
•   Environmental Science and Management (Master of Science 
in Environmental Health and Engineering – MSEH)
•   Family Nurse Practitioner  
(Master of Science in Nursing – MSN)
•   Healthcare Administration (Master of Healthcare 
Administration – MHA)
•   Information Assurance and Cybersecurity (MS)
•   Mechanical Engineering  
(Master of Science in Mechanical Engineering – MSME)
•   Physician Assistant  
(Master of Physician Assistant Science – MPAS)*
•   Public Administration  
(Master of Public Administration – MPA)
•   Speech and Language Pathology (Master of Science – MS)
•   Strategic Communication (Master of Arts – MA)
* NOTE: The Physician Assistant program is limited in the number 
of seats we are able to offer due to limitations set by Gannon’s 
accrediting body. Please contact the Office of Graduate Admis-
sions to inquire about the availability of post-baccalaureate seats.
Graduate Level Certificates 
and Endorsement
Graduate certificate programs involve prescribed sets of courses 
and/or projects/internships that are designed to build expertise 
in a specialized area. The total credit requirements (usually 12 
to 18) are substantially fewer than that of a master’s degree. 
Some students pursue graduate certificates in lieu of making a 
commitment to an entire degree program. Others use certificates to 
build specializations with master’s degree programs, to retool after 
a master’s degree has been earned, or for professional development. 
Certificate students must apply and be accepted on a non-degree 
basis. Gannon University offers the following graduate level 
certificate programs and endorsement program:
Anti-Money Laundering
Business Essentials
District-wide Supervisory Certificate: 
	
Curriculum and Instruction
English as a Second Language Program Specialist 
	
PK-12 Certificate
Family Nurse Practitioner Certificate 
Healthcare Business Analytics
Nurse Anesthesia Certificate 
Principal PK-12 Certificate
Reading Specialist PK-12 Certificate 
Superintendent Letter of Eligibility Certificate 
Coursework for  
Professional Development
As a continuing service to the regional professional community, 
Gannon University offers qualified students the opportunity to 
pursue professional development via sequences of graduate course 
work. Students wishing only to build expertise in areas of interest or 
to gain new knowledge may apply for non-degree status. However, 
like certificate students, non-degree students must satisfy graduate 
level entrance requirements.
7
Admission
Minimum Credit Requirements 
The minimum required number of credits is 30 for a Master’s 
degree and 12 for a certificate Most degree and certificate programs, 
however, have requirements which are in excess of this minimum.
Graduate Student Designations
Each graduate student’s status will be determined based upon the 
specifics of the application decision and the student’s individual 
circumstance.
Degree Status
Students who submit a complete application portfolio and meet the 
program admission requirements qualify for degree status.
Provisional Status for Degree Seeking Students
There are two general circumstances which lead to this designation:
A.	Provisional/Academic
If a student does not meet an admissions criterion (i.e., GPA, test 
scores, etc.) but shows potential in other areas, the student may be 
admitted with provisional/academic status. Continued enrollment is 
contingent upon demonstration of sufficient ability to do graduate 
work. Generally, to receive degree status, students must achieve a 
minimum cumulative average of 3.00 in 9-12 credits of graduate 
work. This is determined by the Program Director.
B.	Provisional/Administrative
This status applies to an applicant showing great promise but 
who has a missing component of information, such as a letter 
of recommendation or test score. This status allows students an 
initial semester to complete the admissions portfolio. In general, 
provisional students may not register for more than one semester 
however, specific programs may have different limits.
In either case, the responsibility is on the student to petition the 
Program Director by letter for a change to degree status as soon 
as the deficit has been alleviated. Generally, credits earned as a 
provisional student are fully applicable to graduate degrees and 
certificates.
Non-Degree Status
This designation is reserved for students who are not pursuing a 
degree at Gannon. There are a variety of common reasons for this 
status, including students who are pursuing a course or two for 
professional development, certificate students, students from other 
graduate schools who are planning to transfer course work back 
to their own institutions, or students who are attending workshops 
and institutes which offer graduate credit. In some cases, with the 
permission of a graduate program director, credits earned as a 
non-degree student may be applied toward a degree or certificate 
program at Gannon.
Except for students in graduate certificate programs, the non-degree 
student is limited to nine credits of graduate course work under 
this status. Only with special permission of the program director 
and respective Academic Dean may a non-degree student enroll 
for more than nine credits.
Admission 
While the requirements for admission to various programs differ, 
the general requirements and procedures are listed below. Please 
refer to the individual program description for specific details.
General Requirements
Applicants for graduate study must hold a bachelor’s degree from 
an appropriately accredited college or university, and demonstrate 
the motivation, ability, and preparation needed to pursue graduate 
study successfully. A determination of this capacity will be made 
by the graduate program director and/or the respective Academic 
Dean, based upon records of undergraduate achievement, prior 
graduate work (if any), scores on required standardized tests (GRE, 
GMAT, etc.), letters of recommendation, and other information. 
Official transcripts and test scores must be sent directly from the 
appropriate institution to the Office of Graduate Admissions of 
Gannon University.
Process
Prospective applicants must submit a completed application for 
graduate study. Applicants should direct all application materials 
and questions regarding the process of admission to the:
Office of Graduate Admissions
109 University Square  •  Erie, PA 16541-0001
Phone (814) 871-7240  •  Toll Free 800-GANNON-U
Email: graduate@gannon.edu
Admissions representatives assist prospective students with any 
questions regarding program admission requirements or the 
decision process.
Programs may require students to apply through a Centralized 
Application Service (CAS).
Standardized Admission Tests
Each of the master’s degree programs has its own requirements 
with regard to standardized admission tests. Please refer to the 
individual program descriptions for the appropriate tests or contact 
a graduate admissions representative. An applicant who already 
holds a graduate degree is not required to take an exam when 
applying to a Gannon master’s degree program. The results of 
standardized tests should be sent directly to the above office from 
the test administrator.
8
Global Students
Gannon has a long tradition of welcoming students and scholars 
from around the world. The presence of global students and scholars 
cultivates a richly diverse learning environment through the varied 
global perspectives they bring both inside and outside of the 
classroom. Intercultural interactions provide Gannon students with 
a wide range of opportunities to expand their global perspectives 
and develop higher level intercultural communication skills.
Admission Requirements
Application
Global students should apply as soon as possible for visa-issuance 
purposes.
Gannon recommends applying by July 1st for the fall intake 
(August) and November 15th for the spring intake (January) to 
ensure adequate time for processing.
Global students need to submit the following:
1. 	International Admission Application.
2. 	Transcripts and final exam results: official English translations; 
undergraduate and graduate-level transcripts need to indicate 
degrees conferred
	
Graduate: all undergraduate and graduate level transcripts 
showing degrees conferred
3. 	Three letters of recommendation
4. 	Affidavit of Support Form along with a bank statement showing 
appropriate funds in U.S. Dollars. Gannon University is required 
by United States immigration law to verify financial resources 
available for a student’s educational and related expenses.
5. 	Additional document(s), statement of purpose, curriculum vitae, 
and standardized test – if applicable. Refer to academic program 
for specific admission requirements.
6. 	Evidence of English Language Proficiency
	
a.	 Native of an English-Speaking Country
	
b.	 Completion of a four-year degree from an accredited U.S. 
university within the past year or similar university in another 
English-Speaking country
	
c.	 TOEFL 79 iBT
	
d.	 The following majors require a 6.5 IELTS score or its 
equivalent: Clinical Mental Health Counseling, Strategic 
Communication, Environmental Health and Engineering, 
Sport and Exercise Science, Athletic Training, Occupational 
Therapy, Physical Therapy. All other majors require a 6.0 
IELTS score or its equivalent.
	
e.	 English3 68
	
f.		 PTE (Pearson Test of English) 53
	
g.	 Duolingo 110 for most programs; see program for details
	
h.	 iTEP 3.8
	
i.		 ELS Language Center, Level 112
	
j.		 Completion of Gannon University’s English as a Second 
Language Program
*	 see Office of Global Admission website for other accepted 
evidence of proficiency.
NOTE: Applicants who meet the academic requirements for a 
specific program, but who do not satisfy the English-language re-
quirement, may be admitted to the university dependent on program 
requirements. These students can meet the language proficiency by 
enrolling and completing Gannon’s English as a Second Language 
(ESL) Program.
Policy on ESL Testing and Placement
Students who do not meet the English language proficiency re-
quirements as defined above must take the ESL placement test 
upon arrival to campus. Depending on the results of the test, stu-
dents will either be exempt from ESL or placed in the appropriate 
level as determined by the placement test. Students applying for 
all computer science programs, as well as the MBA in Business 
Analytics program are required to submit English scores at the 
time of their application. 
Financial Requirements
Students must submit financial documents in conjunction with the 
Affidavit of Support Form as part of the requirements for issuing 
the Form I-20. Per United States immigration law, the Affidavit of 
Support Form and supporting documentation must show that all 
educational expenses, including tuition, off-campus living, books, 
and health insurance, can be fully met by the student for the first 
academic year.
Once a student has been admitted and the Affidavit of Support Form 
has been approved, the student will be issued the Form I-20 as a 
basis for making an appointment at the US Consulate. Students must 
notify the Office of Global Support and Student Engagement of 
their planned date of arrival after receiving their visa. All students 
are required to fill out the Attendance Confirmation Form located 
on our website at www.gannon.edu/ConfirmAttendance.
Global students are required to pay a non-refundable deposit to keep 
their Form I-20 valid. Students who pay more than the required 
deposit are eligible to receive a refund of the amount exceeding 
the non-refundable deposit in accordance to university policies. 
Information regarding graduate assistantships should be referred 
to the respective academic department for one’s program of study.
Refer to the Tuition and Fees information provided in this catalog 
or on Gannon’s website.
9
Global Students
Office of Global Support  
and Student Engagement
The Office of Global Support and Student Engagement (OGSSE) 
strives to provide an environment, services, and programs to ensure 
that our global students will thrive and succeed at Gannon. The 
OGSSE works closely with departments across campus and with the 
broader local community to design opportunities for global students 
to establish friendships and meaningful connections with their 
classmates, professors, and other members of their new community 
in the U.S. Examples of such programs and resources include:
•	 Pre-arrival correspondence and registration information on and 
Global Student Orientation
•	 Social Media and the OGSSE Website
•	 Cultural Programming 
•	 Workshops on global student topics
•	 Advocacy, Referral, and Global Student and Family Resources
•	 Student Organization Support and Advising
The Office of Global Support and Student Engagement is 
responsible for student and University compliance with U.S. 
immigration regulations, as well as reporting required data to the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) through the Student and 
Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS). To understand and 
maintain federal regulations governing their immigration status 
and attendance in school, all new students coming to Gannon 
University on F-1 and J-1 visas are required to attend Global 
Student Orientation.
Enrollment Requirements: Global students are required to enroll 
each semester in a full course of study. For graduate students, 9 
credits per semester is considered full time. In the event a student 
needs to drop below a full course load, s/he must contact the 
Office of Global Support and Student Engagement for assistance 
in following SEVIS processes to maintain status.
Employment Benefits: F-1 and J-1 students are eligible to work 
on-campus up to 20 hours per week while school is in session, and 
full time (up to 40 hours/week) during break periods, including 
summer. In general, F-1 students are not eligible for off-campus 
work authorization except in extreme circumstances.
CPT or Curricular Practical Training is the work authorization 
available to F-1 students to work off-campus in paid or unpaid 
positions that are an integral part of students’ academic program 
(such as internships and co-ops). Proper paperwork must be filed 
with the OGSSE to authorize CPT as it must be documented on 
a student’s I-20 prior to starting. Current students in active status 
are eligible for CPT after one academic year (two semesters) of 
full-time study, not including summer sessions.
OPT or Optional Practical Training is off-campus work 
authorization provided to F-1 students following graduation as 
an opportunity for employment directly related to students’ field 
of study for up to 12 months (36 months if in a STEM-eligible 
program). The OGSSE assists students in applying to United 
States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) for OPT 
authorization to work in the US.
NOTE: Spouses and dependents of F-1 students (F-2 visa holders) 
are not legally allowed to work in the U.S. 
Health Insurance: Gannon University has a policy that man-
dates that all enrolled global students must have health insurance 
coverage. Students will be subscribed to Gannon’s contracted 
health insurance provider and charged accordingly. Students who 
do not want to be charged for health insurance must demonstrate 
coverage through an approved alternative before the deadline set 
by the OGSSE.
Office of English Language  
and Global Training
Gannon University’s English as a Second Language Program 
prepares non-native speakers to achieve the language competency 
necessary to succeed in an English language medium of instruction 
at the post-secondary level. The program guides students in 
their cultural adjustment to the United States by developing 
and strengthening their language ability, academic skills, and 
intercultural competence. Through its academic programming, as 
well as specialized services provided to English language learners, 
the program supports the University’s mission by its commitment 
to excellence in teaching, scholarship and service.
English as a Second Language Program
Gannon University’s English as a Second Language Program 
prepares non-native speakers to achieve the language competency 
necessary to succeed in an English language medium of instruction 
at the post-secondary level. The program guides students in 
their cultural adjustment to the United States by developing 
and strengthening their language ability, academic skills, and 
intercultural competence. Through its academic programming, as 
well as specialized services provided to English language learners, 
the program supports the University’s mission by its commitment 
to excellence in teaching, scholarship and service.
The English as a Second Language Program is designed to meet the 
needs of students who are accepted to Gannon University and have 
yet to reach the required English language proficiency. Students 
who do not meet the required minimum benchmark must enroll in 
the ESL Program. Students will take a placement exam that will 
determine their language level. Students may place in one of the 
six levels: Beginning 1, Beginning 2, Intermediate 1, Intermediate 
2, Advanced 1, and Advanced 2. 
10
Each level can be completed in one nine-week session. At each 
level students take four core courses: reading, writing, grammar, 
and listening and speaking, as well as special courses tailored to 
support the needs of the students at a particular level. 
The Commission on English Language Program  
Accreditation (CEA)
100 North Fairfax Street, Suite 630
Alexandria, VA 22314
703-665-3400 https://cea-accredit.org/
Online Student Services
Online courses at Gannon are designed using the Quality Matters
rubric and are typically asynchronous allowing students to work
through course content and activities as their schedule allows
each week. Gannon’s online course format follows weekly course
modules aligned to specific weekly learning objectives. While
course delivery is asynchronous, there are weekly schedules in each
module with deadlines for student discussion activities, assignments
and assessments. Some courses may include some synchronous
activities like student presentations and group work which utilize
Adobe Connect. All online courses are facilitated using Gannon’s
learning management system which is Blackboard Learn (https://
gannon.blackboard.com)
Course design philosophies at Gannon are focused on engaging, 
student-centered instruction that promotes significant and 
meaningful interactive learning to meet weekly learning objectives 
and course outcomes. Gannon’s online courses utilize an “Ask the 
Instructor” discussion board that instructors check on a daily basis 
for student questions. Additionally, Gannon courses utilize active 
discussion-based activities to promote learning communities with 
the close participation of Gannon’s faculty.
Finally, each online course includes a course design student 
survey to inform future iterations of the course making the online 
instruction stronger as the course matures. These courses are 
indicated as being offered online in the course description.
Tuition and Fees
2024-2025
Tuition and fees for 2024-2025 are subject to change.
TUITION
College of Humanities, Education and Social Sciences
Clinical Mental Health Counseling	
$795/credit
Criminalistics – Online	
$825/credit 
Curriculum and Instruction (M.Ed.) – Online	
$600/credit 
ESL Program Specialist – Online	
$600/credit
Principal PreK-12 Certification – Online	
$600/credit
Public Administration	
$765/credit 
Reading Specialist Certification
	
M.Ed. in Reading – Online	
$600/credit 
Strategic Communication	
$990/credit 
Superintendent Letter of Eligibility – Online	
$600/credit 
Supervisor of Curriculum – Online	
$600/credit
College of Engineering and Business
Biomedical Engineering	
$1,260/credit 
Business Administration (MBA) – Online	
$990/credit 
Business Analytics (MBA)	
$1,135/credit
Business Essentials (GCT) – Online	
$990/credit 
Computer and Information Science
	
Data Science	 	
$1,260/credit
	
Information Technology	
$1,260/credit
	
Software Engineering	
$1,260/credit
Electrical Engineering	
$1,260/credit
Embedded Software Engineering	
$1,260/credit
Engineering Management	
$1,260/credit 
Environmental Science and Management	
$1,260/credit 
Healthcare Administration (MHA)	
$990/credit 
Healthcare Administration (MHA) – Online	
$990/credit 
Healthcare Business Analytics (GCT) – Online	
$990/credit 
Information Assurance and Cybersecurity (MS)	
$1,135/credit 
Mechanical Engineering	
$1,260/credit
11
Financial Aid
Morosky College of Health Professions and Sciences
Applied Exercise Physiology (MS)	
$765/credit
Athletic Training (MAT)	
$765/credit 
Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) – Online	
$900/credit 
Family Nurse Practitioner – Online	
$900/credit 
Family Nurse Practitioner (GCT) – Online	
$900/credit 
Nurse Anesthesia (DNP)	
$1,260/credit
Nurse Anesthesia Certification	
$1,260/credit 
Occupational Therapy Program – 5th Year	
$1,435/credit 
Post-Baccalaureate Occupational
	
Therapy Program	
$1,435/credit
Post-Professional Occupational
	
Therapy Doctorate – Online	
$875/credit 
Doctor of Physical Therapy
	
10+ credits (full-time)	
$19,605/semester 
Less than 10 credits (part-time)	
$10,910/semester 
Physician Assistant Program – 5th Year	
$1,435/credit 
Post-Baccalaureate Physician Assistant Program $1,435/credit 
Speech-Language Pathology	
$1,250/credit
Check, Cashier’s Check, or Money Order
•	 Cash payments
•	 On-Line Payment
	
E-Check and Credit Card payments can be made on Gannon Self 
Service or at www.gannon.edu/epayment. There is no charge for 
E-Check transactions. A service fee is assessed on debit/credit 
card transactions. Cards accepted: VISA, MasterCard, Discover 
and American Express.
•	 Semester Payment Plan
	
A Semester Payment Plan is available through Transact each 
semester for a $55 processing fee. More information can be 
found in the Student Finance Section of Gannon Self-Service.
•	 Company/School District Reimbursement
	
A student who receives 100% reimbursement must make a 
$100 down payment per term. A student who receives partial 
reimbursement must pay tuition or fees not covered by their 
employer. In both cases, payment must be made by the time 
the semester bill is due. The balance is deferred until 30 days 
(45 days for school district reimbursement) from the last day 
of the semester. Any student who fails to make payment in full 
by this date will be liable for a $50 late fee. Employer or grade 
delays will have no effect on the final payment date.
The Company/School District Reimbursement Agreement is limited 
to credit courses. Application fees and late fees cannot be deferred. 
These fees, if applicable, are payable at the time charged. Books 
cannot be deferred. It is the student’s responsibility to provide the 
employer with grades and/or other necessary paperwork to obtain 
reimbursement. 
It is the student’s responsibility to make payment of the semester 
balance to Gannon. Students should also ensure that the conditions 
of reimbursement are stated clearly and completely on the 
reimbursement form by their employer.
Indebtedness Policy
A student who is in debt to the University may not register, receive 
an official transcript, or receive their diploma from the Registrar 
until the indebtedness has been discharged.
Past Due Accounts
Past due accounts without satisfactory arrangements with Gannon’s 
Cashier Office will be turned over to a collection agency. All 
reasonable collection costs, including attorney fees and other 
charges necessary for collection, will be the student’s responsibility.
Financial Aid 
Gannon operates a full-time office with financial aid representatives 
who will work with you to facilitate your financial needs. These 
individuals have access to information relative to loans, grants, and 
programs at all private and government levels. Graduate students 
should contact Gannon’s Financial Aid Office at the earliest possible 
time to facilitate processing. 
Federal Direct Student Loan (FDSL) 
Full and part-time graduate students are eligible to apply for a 
student loan. Students must file the Free Application for Federal 
Student Aid (FAFSA) and have a FDSL Master Promissory Note 
on file. FAFSA applications can be completed online at: 
https://studentaid.gov/
The FDSL MPN is available online at: 
https://studentaid.gov/mpn/
Students may be eligible to borrow up to $20,500 per academic 
year, depending on the number of credits for which the student is 
enrolled. Students must successfully meet all Satisfactory Academic 
Progress requirements to be eligible for the next increment of 
$20,500. Please note: Graduate students are not eligible for PELL 
or PA State grants.
12
Graduate Student Incentive Awards
Students may qualify for a Graduate Student Incentive Award. 
The awards range from $100 – $525 per semester and are 
available to graduate students who are receiving no other form of 
assistance such as scholarship, grant, tuition discount, or company 
reimbursement (excluding educational loans). To be considered for 
this award, you must be a US citizen or eligible non-citizen and 
complete either the FAFSA or a Graduate Student Incentive Award 
application. Online programs and certain majors are excluded 
from this scholarship program. Refer to the Office of Graduate 
Admissions brochure “Financial Facts and Policies for Graduate 
Students” for additional information or contact the Financial Aid 
Office. Graduate Student Incentive Award applications are available 
in the Offices of Graduate Admissions and Financial Aid.
Gannon University Grant  
for Diocesan Employees
Full-time employees of the Catholic Diocese of Erie or an approved 
affiliate institution are eligible for the Gannon University Grant 
for Diocesan Employees. This grant from Gannon University is 
designed to assist Diocesan employees who are continuing their 
education at Gannon University on a part-time (fewer than 9 credits 
per semester) basis. Students are not eligible if they are enrolled in 
Health Science or a Doctoral program. For additional information 
refer to the Office of Graduate Admissions brochure “Financial 
Facts and Policies for Graduate Students” or contact the Education 
Office of the Diocese of Erie. Students cannot be receiving any 
other type of assistance.
Application forms are available in the Office of Graduate 
Admissions and the Education Office of the Diocese of Erie. The 
application must be completed by the student and approved by the 
Vicar of Education each semester and submitted to the Financial 
Aid Office prior to the due date of the bill. Once the approved 
application is received, the grant will be applied to the student’s bill.
Veteran Affairs Education Benefits
GI Bill® is a registered trademark of the U.S. Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA). More information about education benefits 
offered by VA is available at the official U.S. government website 
at https://benefits.va.gov/gibill/.
Benefits currently available to the veteran under the GI Bill® can 
range from $200 a month to tuition and fees. Many opportunities 
such as tutoring, counseling, and remedial programs can be 
explained to the veteran by contacting the School Certifying Official 
in the Financial Aid Office.
Pennsylvania veterans are offered maximum state grant awards. 
Federal grants and loans are additional sources of financial aid to 
the veteran.
Additionally, the School Certifying Official may also provide a 
referral service to veterans for federal, state, and county services 
which are not a part of any veteran’s program but are available to 
the veteran.
Gannon University will take veteran status into consideration in 
making decisions regarding admission. Up to 6 credits of Military 
Science can be awarded to the student for his or her military 
training. Additionally, many schools previously attended, and 
training received while in the service allow for the granting of 
credit for corresponding university courses.
Policy on VA Tuition and Fees Payment
In accordance with Title 38 US Code 3679 subsection (e), this 
school adopts the following additional provisions for any students 
using U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) Post 9/11 G.I. 
Bill® (Ch. 33) or Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment (Ch. 
31) benefits, while payment to the institution is pending from the 
VA. This school will not:
•   Prevent the student’s enrollment.
•   Assess a late penalty fee to the student.
•   Require the student to secure alternative or additional funding.
•   Deny the student access to any resources (access to classes, 
libraries, or other institutional facilities) available to other 
students who have satisfied their tuition and fee bills to the 
institution.
However, to qualify for this provision, such students may be 
required to:
•   Produce the VA Certificate of Eligibility (COE) by the first day 
of class.
•   Provide a written request to be certified.
•   Provide additional information needed to properly certify the 
enrollment as described in other institutional policies.
Policy Statement on Satisfactory 
Academic Progress
Students must meet three minimum academic requirements to 
remain eligible to receive financial aid from federal, state, and 
institutional sources. These standards, known as Satisfactory 
Academic Progress (SAP), were developed in accordance with 
federal regulations. SAP requirements are measured cumulatively, 
from the student’s first date of enrollment through graduation. 
Students are evaluated after each period of enrollment to determine 
if they are continuing to meet SAP requirements. SAP requirements 
are measured by the student’s cumulative grade point average, the 
percentage of successfully completed course, and the maximum 
number of credits attempt before exhausting all eligibility for future 
financial aid.
GPA Requirement
Students must earn a 3.00 Cumulative Grade Point Average or 
higher to remain eligible to receive financial aid.
13
Grading System
Pace Requirement
Students must maintain a cumulative pace of 67% to remain 
eligible to receive financial aid. Pace is calculated by dividing 
the cumulative number of credits the students has successfully 
completed by the cumulative number of credits attempted.
Maximum Timeframe Requirement
Students must complete all credit requirements towards earning 
their degree before reaching 150% of the programs published 
credit requirements. For example, if a program requires a student 
to complete 130 credits for their degree, the student must earn 
the degree before attempting 195 credits. 130 credits x 150% = 
195 credits.
SAP Appeal
Students have the right to appeal the loss of aid if they fail to meet 
one or more SAP requirements. Please refer to Gannon’s Financial 
Aid web page under Forms and Documentation for additional 
policy and procedure information regarding Satisfactory Academic 
Progress (SAP) for institutional, state and federal grants and loans.
Career Exploration  
and Development
Located in the Student Success Center, the Career Exploration 
and Development team can be a resource for graduate students. 
The staff interacts with students and graduates from all academic 
disciplines and supports individuals interested in learning about the 
world of work and exploring possible destinations. Students are 
encouraged to authenticate their job seeker accounts on Gannon’s 
online career portal, Handshake, and pursue the employment and 
experiential learning opportunities that are posted on a continual 
basis. One- on-one career advising is also available and there are 
a variety of initiatives throughout the academic year in which 
graduate students can engage. Email us at career@gannon.edu.
Assistantships
Graduate assistantship positions may be available to a limited 
number of enrolled students in specific academic programs. This 
information is available from each program, including when 
applications are accepted and the details of the hiring process. 
These positions are 10 hours per week. Available positions are 
posted on the Employment at Gannon site under Staff and Graduate 
Assistant Positions.
Advising 
The essence of a quality graduate experience, regardless of the 
program, is academic advising. Each program has its own unique 
system for delivering information and monitoring the progress of 
its graduate students; thus, it is essential that each graduate student 
contact the director of his or her program to ask for direction. 
This advice is most important at the onset of the program to 
avoid scheduling conflicts and problems with course sequencing, 
and to assure that the steps required to complete the program 
are understood.
Scheduling
We make every effort to create schedules which provide convenience 
and ease for graduate students. Since many students work full or 
part-time, some graduate courses are scheduled in the evenings, on 
weekends, or online. The fall academic semester begins in August 
and the spring semester begins in January. In addition, there are a 
variety of summer offerings generally designed to meet the needs 
of students in specific programs.
Class Attendance
Attendance at all classes and laboratory sessions is expected of all 
students and all courses are conducted with this understanding. 
A student’s grades are based upon the general quality of work 
performed in each course and by such factors as prompt completion 
of all assignments, papers, and readings, by presence for all 
examinations, and by participation in class discussion. Ultimately, 
it is the responsibility of each faculty member to set reasonable 
attendance policies appropriate to individual courses and to publish 
those policies on course syllabi. When so indicated on the course 
syllabus, class attendance may directly influence final grades in 
a course.
When taking an online course, the instructor may not have a fixed 
weekly meeting time, but consistent attendance is still expected. 
The following actions demonstrate attendance:
1. 	Logging into the course and participating in the first introductory 
	
activity.
2. 	Frequently and regularly accessing course instructional materials 
	
each week over the entire term.
3. 	Timely submission of assignments.
4. 	Participating in scheduled weekly course activities.
Grading System 
The work of all graduate students is evaluated and then reported 
in terms of the following grades:	
	
	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
Grade Points 
Grade	 	 	
	 	 	
	
Per Credit Hour
A+	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
4.0
A	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
4.0
A-		 	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
3.7
B+	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
3.3
B	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
3.0
B-		 	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
2.7
C+	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
2.3
C	 	 	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
2.0
F	 (Failure)		 	 	
	
0
I	 (Incomplete)	 	
0
X	 (Withdrawal)	 	
0
P	 (Pass)	
	 	 	
	
0
AU	(Audit)		 	 	
	
0
14
A program may require students receiving a grade below B- in a 
specific course to repeat that course. A program may limit a student 
to two grades below B-. No student may graduate with a GPA below 
3.0. There is no pass/fail election.
Grade Change
A grade change can only be initiated by the faculty member who 
gave the grade. Students who feel there has been an error in grading, 
or who wish to challenge a grade, should contact their professor.
Grade Point Average 
Computation 
Computation of Grade Point Average for a semester or cumulatively 
is accomplished by dividing total grade points earned by the total 
semester hours for courses where a letter grade between A+ and F 
is received. In some circumstances, certain courses not appropriate 
for a program (e.g., when a student changes programs) may be 
excluded from the computation of the GPA in the program. The 
grade of “A+” carries the same GPA weight as an A but represents 
academic work of extraordinary distinction.
Incomplete Grades 
Incomplete grades may be assigned at the discretion of the faculty 
member in cases of serious need. Students may request “I” grades, 
but the decision to grant this concession will be made by the 
faculty member. Students who receive an incomplete grade will 
have 30 days to complete the incomplete work. Incomplete grades 
which are not finished within this time period will be changed to 
the grade of “F”, unless an extension is petitioned and granted by 
the appropriate faculty member and department chair and made 
with the department in writing. Exceptions on extensions may be 
made in cases of the thesis or research project or for extenuating 
circumstances. Extensions may not exceed 365 days from the 
completion of the course.
International students, in proper F-1 or J-1 status, are advised that 
receipt of an “I” grade may impact their student visa status. The 
implications of an “I” grade must be discussed with the Office of 
Global Support and Student Engagement before an international 
student requests an “I” grade from his instructor. The Office of 
Global Support and Student Engagement must be contacted for 
this support and guidance.
Thesis or Research Project
For thesis and research projects, students should refer to the 
program’s guidelines for advice and direction.
Comprehensive Examination 
Many graduate programs require that a student achieve a satisfactory 
rating in a comprehensive examination. The comprehensive 
examination is ordinarily written but, at the option of departmental 
faculty, an oral examination may be required in addition to or in lieu 
of the written exam. The comprehensive exam is an evaluation of 
the student’s ability to integrate the content of the program’s courses 
and research. Comprehensive examinations are administered on a 
date that shall be arranged by the individual program director. A 
student who fails the comprehensive may petition for permission to 
retake the examination during the next scheduled period. Graduate 
students are eligible to take the comprehensive examination two 
times only. A student who fails the comprehensive examination a 
second time is subject to dismissal.
Statute of Limitations
University policy requires that students must complete a Master’s 
degree program within six years of matriculating into the program 
of study. Individual programs may establish a shorter statute of 
limitations. Consult the program director for exceptions.
University policy requires that students must complete a doctoral 
degree program within seven years of matriculating into the 
program of study. Individual programs may establish a shorter 
statute of limitations. Consult the program director for exceptions.
Exceptions can be granted only by the program director and the 
Academic Dean. The statutes of limitations are not extended due 
to interruption of study or medical leave.
Dismissal 
Students may be dismissed from Graduate Studies for academic 
and/or professional reasons.
Academic: All students whose GPA falls below 3.0 are subject to 
review each semester by their program director and their Academic 
Dean. Separation from the University is the responsibility of the 
appropriate Academic Dean in consultation with the program 
director.
Professional: All students whose professional behavior in the 
classroom or in clinical situations falls below professional standards 
will be subject to dismissal from the program.
Appeal of dismissal action may be made to the Academic Dean. 
Reinstatement to graduate studies at Gannon is possible only with 
written permission of the Academic Dean. 
15
Academic Forgiveness Policy
Academic Probation  
and Separation Policy
Academic Probation is a serious warning that the student has failed 
to meet the University’s minimum academic standards. Students are 
expected to work well above the minimum, both for their individual 
benefit and for the good of the entire academic community. In fact, 
students are expected to achieve the highest quality of academic 
work of which they are capable.
Probationary status is a conditional permission for a student to 
continue studying at the University until he or she regains good 
academic standing or is separated from the University for having 
failed to regain good standing. The Academic Probation and 
Separation Policy is as follows:
Graduate Student Academic Action for a cumulative grade point 
average below 3.0 will be based upon the following guidelines:
1.	 Graduate students who have attempted fewer than 9 credits at 
Gannon University will receive a letter of warning.
2.	 Graduate students who receive a provisional academic admission 
and have attempted 9 credits or more at Gannon University will 
be dismissed.
3.	 Graduate students who received a regular admission and 
attempted 9 credits or more but fewer than 24 credits at Gannon 
University will be placed on academic probation. Graduate 
students who fail to raise their cumulative grade point average 
to a 3.0 or above after attempting 9 additional credits will be 
dismissed.
4.	 Notwithstanding the prior guidelines, graduate students who 
have attempted 9 credits or more at Gannon University whose 
cumulative grade point average is less than 2.3 will be dismissed.
5.	 Graduate students who have attempted 24 credits or more at 
Gannon University will be subject to dismissal.
None of these guidelines will supersede individual program 
requirements that create a higher expectation.
Appropriate College Deans will notify students who have been 
placed on academic probation. These students will be expected 
to engage in academic advisement program and concentrate their 
energies on their studies so that they can bring their work up to 
the required standard.
Except with the written permission of both the Vice-President 
for Academic Affairs and the Dean of Student Development, 
students on probation may not hold office in any University 
organization, participate in any intercollegiate events or programs, 
or otherwise represent the University lest they further jeopardize 
their academic standing.
Students who are separated from the University may not enroll 
in any University credit course for one full year. Applications for 
readmission will not be reconsidered until the expiration of one year. 
Readmission is not a right. The Admissions Committee will take 
favorable action only when it is satisfied that the factors which led 
to the failure have been rectified. It is the student’s responsibility to 
demonstrate that he or she has a reasonable prospect for academic 
success at Gannon. Any student readmitted will be on probation 
and assigned to special advisement program for the first semester 
following his or her return. If the student is separated a second 
time, he or she will not be readmitted.
Students who are separated may appeal that separation to their 
College Dean. Such an appeal would need to cite extraordinary 
circumstances that adversely affected academic performance. The 
College Dean will review all such appeals.
Academic Forgiveness Policy
The Academic Forgiveness Policy is intended to assist former 
graduate students whose cumulative graduate GPA is below 3.00 to 
enroll in a graduate program without having to overcome the burden 
of prior unsatisfactory academic performance. Any former student 
who has not been enrolled in graduate course work for at least 24 
consecutive months is eligible to apply for academic forgiveness. 
Academic forgiveness sets aside former grades earned as a graduate 
student, ensuring that previous grades will not be calculated into 
the cumulative graduate GPA. 
Credits for courses with grades of B or better earned in a prior 
graduate program may transfer into the new graduate program and 
count towards total credits needed for degree completion in the 
new program. The courses themselves will need to be evaluated 
by the new Program Director to ascertain whether they match 
an equivalent course in the new program; otherwise, they will 
be electives. Please note, there is no guarantee that your credits 
will transfer into the new program. Transferability of credits is 
dependent on program curriculum and program discretion. Grades 
for courses with a B or better (and all other grades earned in a prior 
graduate program) do not carry into the new graduate program 
under the academic forgiveness policy. 
Students dismissed for unsatisfactory academic performance must 
apply for readmission through the Office of Graduate Admissions. 
Applications for readmission must be submitted in advance of the 
term in which the graduate student intends to enroll. 
To be eligible for academic forgiveness, the student must:
1.	 Be accepted through the readmission process with the Office of 
Graduate Admissions to a graduate degree program.
2.	 Submit an Academic Forgiveness Request (housed in the Dean’s 
office) to the Program Director of the program he/she wishes to 
be admitted to; this request must be approved by the Program 
Director and Dean of the College before the student can register 
for any graduate credits in the program.
16
3.	 Earn a minimum grade point average of at least 3.0 in the first 
nine (9) graduate credit hours completed since returning.
4.	 Academic forgiveness will not apply to doctoral or clinical 
doctorate programs.
Assuming the above eligibility requirements are met, the following 
will happen:
1.	 Each grade that is subject to this policy will remain on the 
students’ official graduate transcript, but previous grades will 
not be calculated into the student’s cumulative graduate GPA. 
2.	 Former grades earned at Gannon University in a graduate 
program of below a “B” are excluded from counting towards 
any degree requirements in other Gannon University graduate 
programs or certificates. Prior coursework where grades of 
“B” or better were earned would be subject to the review of 
the Program Director and the transfer credit policy in assessing 
the transferability of prior coursework towards new program 
coursework. 
3.	 There is no guarantee an application for academic forgiveness 
will be approved. In some cases, accreditation standards or 
other oversight bodies for a particular degree or certificate 
program may prohibit the utilization of academic forgiveness. 
In these cases, their standards will supersede the Gannon 
University policy.
The following conditions apply to anyone seeking academic 
forgiveness: 
1.	 Any former student not enrolled in graduate course work for at 
least 24 consecutive months is eligible to apply for academic 
forgiveness 
2.	 Any prior semesters’ academic dishonesty violations, probations, 
suspensions, or dismissals noted in the students’ academic 
records will remain.
3.	 Academic forgiveness cannot apply once a student earns a 
graduate degree or certificate.
4.	 Academic forgiveness can only be applied to a students’ 
academic record one time, regardless of the number of times 
a student applies to or takes courses in a Gannon University 
graduate degree or certificate program.
5.	 Each appeal for academic forgiveness will be considered on 
a case-by-case basis. If granted, the Registrar’s Office will 
recalculate the GU graduate cumulative GPA accordingly. The 
courses and grades will remain a part of the student’s academic 
record. A notation will appear on the transcript indicating the 
student was approved for academic forgiveness.
Transfer of Credits
Transfer credits from other institutions are accepted at the discretion 
of program directors. Generally, a maximum of six credits from 
an accredited university may be accepted in transfer for courses in 
which a student received at least a grade of “B” (3.0). 
Changing Graduate Programs
New Graduate Students 
If a student has been accepted to a graduate program and seeks to 
change to a different program prior to the beginning of their first 
semester, they must request that their existing application be sent to 
the new program director from Graduate or Global Admissions for 
review. Acceptance is at the discretion of the new program director 
and is not guaranteed. With the new program director’s approval, 
a plan of study can be created. Students may not be able to begin 
the new program immediately due to the nature of the graduate 
program. Programs are not required to allow a change of program 
during the first semester. Students should refer to any program or 
College specific policies for exceptions.
Current Graduate Students
Graduate students who are enrolled in one program may seek to 
switch into another graduate program at Gannon. The decision to 
accept such transfers is at the discretion of the new program director 
and, for students whose cumulative grade point average is below 
3.0, the respective Academic Dean.
Students who change programs are required to meet with the new 
program director and have a new program plan developed. While 
all courses taken will remain on a single graduate transcript, it 
will be the prerogative of the new director to select courses from 
those previously completed to become part of the new program 
requirements.
For purposes of the Academic Program GPA computation, the new 
program director will compute a grade point average on the basis 
of the courses which are required for that particular program. At 
the time that the new program director interviews a student, a letter 
identifying the courses factored into the GPA is to be shared with 
the student and placed in the student’s graduate file.
Concurrent Graduate Degrees 
If accepted into two graduate programs of study at the same time, 
students may work towards graduate degrees concurrently. To be 
eligible for simultaneous enrollment in more than one graduate 
program, students must complete a minimum of 9 credit hours in 
the first-degree program and be in good academic standing (3.0 
or greater cumulative GPA). To add a second program of study, 
students must complete and obtain all required signatures on the 
“Add a Second Degree” form and the “Second Degree Program 
Plan”, which will determine eligibility for entrance into an 
additional program and the course of study required to earn each 
graduate degree. A maximum of twelve credits within the second 
degree can be part of the first degree. Students who have not been 
accepted into an additional graduate degree program by the deadline 
for application for graduation from the first-degree program are not 
considered concurrent, and should refer to the section regarding 
Second Master’s Degree to consider seeking out additional graduate 
level degrees at Gannon. Since program entry requirements into a 
17
Auditing
second graduate degree program may limit the number of credits 
that can be utilized to satisfy degree requirement taken prior to 
entrance into the program, students are encouraged to apply early 
into additional graduate programs that are desired to be completed 
concurrently with another degree. In CEB, graduate credits can be 
double counted once.
Second Master’s Degree 
An increasing number of students are expressing interest in earning 
a second Gannon master’s degree. In cases where (1) the first 
master’s degree has been earned recently, (2) select course work 
from the first degree would normally be part of the second degree, 
and (3) the graduate program director judges the application of these 
credits to be appropriate, up to twelve credits of upper (600 or 700) 
level course work within the second master’s degree level course 
work may be accepted in transfer from the first degree.
Course applicability would require that the earlier course work, 
rather than the degree itself, be recent (no more than seven years 
old) and judged by the graduate program director to be an appropri-
ate substitution for course work within the second master’s degree. 
Interruption of Study
For Masters students
It is expected that degree-seeking students will make steady and 
continued progress towards completion of the program. However, 
students occasionally must interrupt their studies to take a semester 
(or more) off due to personal or professional needs. Each program 
handles this situation differently, and the student should contact 
the program director as needed. Forms for documenting the leave 
of absence or withdrawal from the University are available in the 
Office of the respective Academic Dean. However, if a student 
has been off for two years or longer, that student must re-apply for 
admission to the Office of Graduate Admissions.
For Doctoral Students
Doctoral students who need to interrupt their program of study for 
personal or professional reasons must complete a leave of absence 
form and have it signed by their program director or department 
chair. Unless excused by an official leave of absence (which in no 
case may exceed one year throughout the student’s degree program), 
all doctoral students are required to be continuously enrolled and 
must pay tuition and fees to remain in the program. Criteria for what 
constitutes continuous enrollment varies by program, as specified 
in the program listings in this catalog. If a student fails to obtain 
a Leave of Absence or maintain continuous enrollment in their 
program of study, he or she is required to apply for readmission 
and must be in good financial standing with the University before 
readmission is granted. Under no circumstances may a student 
utilize a leave of absence to pursue courses in another graduate 
program at Gannon University.
For International Students
In order to fulfill academic attendance requirements imposed by the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), international students, 
in F-1 or J-1 nonimmigrant status, are required to complete an 
academic year (two consecutive semesters) before taking a break 
in coursework. If so desired, F-1 or J-1 international students may 
enroll continuously without taking advantage of the break period 
earned after two consecutive semesters of attendance. Those 
students seeking a break should always consult with the Office 
of Global Support and Student Engagement (OGSSE) so that the 
authorized break is approved and properly reported to DHS. If 
an international student interrupts study during the required two 
consecutive semesters, without proper authorization from the 
OGSSE, they will risk a serious immigration violation, requiring 
either an application to DHS for reinstatement to student status or 
departure and re-entry to the United States. Depending on the timing 
of a departure from the United States, re-entry into the United 
States to resume studies may require an application for readmission 
submitted to the Office of Global Admissions and Outreach. 
Repeat Courses
A student may repeat a course. The student is required to take the 
course at Gannon and submit a repeat course request digitally on 
the Registrar’s Office website if he or she wishes to have the repeat 
noted on the transcript. When a student elects to repeat a course, 
the letter “R” will be placed in front of the original grade and the 
original grade will not be calculated in the grade point average 
(GPA). This policy is limited to 6 credits of course work. Each 
repeat registration is counted as a course. Courses repeated beyond 
6 credits will have both grades calculated in the GPA. Repeated 
courses can only be included once in all degree requirements 
for graduation.
Level 500 Courses
The general rule is that a 500-level course may be taken by 
undergraduates only in their senior year, either for undergraduate 
credit (cross-listed as a 400-level course) or for graduate credit 
with permission of the program director. However, because of the 
nature of integrated programs, 500-level courses may be taken in 
the junior year; such programmatic exceptions must be approved 
by the Academic Affairs Committee of the college based upon a 
recommendation from the Graduate Council.
Auditing 
With permission of the faculty member and program director, 
persons holding bachelor’s degrees may audit select course 
offerings. No graduate credit is awarded to audit students. The 
conditions of the audit about assignments and examinations will be 
determined by the faculty member after discussing each situation 
with the audit student. Auditors must have written approval of the 
course instructor and are advised that they cannot retroactively 
upgrade to credit-seeking status after the first two weeks of the 
regular semester. Additionally, after the first two weeks of the 
18
semester, a credit student cannot switch to audit status. Once 
written instructor permission is obtained, students should contact 
the Registrar’s Office. Records of the course will be noted on a 
student transcript with a grade of “AU” which carries neither credits 
nor grade points.
Graduation 
Degrees are conferred three times per year, in December, May, 
and August. Attendance at the Commencement ceremonies, which 
are held in May and December, is highly recommended, since 
graduation is such an important and joyous occasion in the life of 
academic institutions. 
A graduate student completing all requirements by the end of the 
spring semester, or end of the summer semester participates in the 
May ceremony. A graduate student will participate in the December 
ceremony if all their requirements are completed by the end of the 
fall semester. 
Prospective graduates must complete an application for graduation 
by November 15 for May or August graduation and by May 31 
for December graduation. The application is available within the 
Self-Service in the Graduation Overview module. The graduation 
application collects important information such as phonetic spelling 
for announcement at Commencement, and height and weight to 
order regalia for those attending the ceremony. All graduates are 
assessed a graduation fee of $150 to their semester bill, regardless 
of participation in the ceremony. 
Failure to apply for graduation by the appropriate deadline may 
result in the loss of such privileges as participation in the ceremony, 
consideration for awards, and name listed in the commencement 
program.
Academic Regulations
Academic Integrity Policy 
Gannon University considers the maintenance of academic integrity 
of utmost importance and stresses that students are responsible for 
thoroughly understanding this code. Absolute integrity is expected 
of every Gannon student in all academic undertakings; the student 
must in no way misrepresent his/her work, fraudulently or unfairly 
advance his/her academic status, or be a party to another student’s 
failure to maintain integrity. The maintenance of an atmosphere 
of academic honor and the fulfillment of the provisions of this 
code are the responsibilities of the students and faculty of Gannon 
University. Therefore, all students and faculty members shall adhere 
to the basic principles of this Code. Each student will receive the 
Code of Academic Integrity publication of Gannon University 
during Freshman Orientation or entrance into the University. Upon 
review of the publication, the students will be invited to sign a 
pledge to uphold the Academic Integrity of their work and the 
work of their peers.
I. Forms of Academic Dishonesty
Plagiarism
Plagiarism is the inclusion of someone else’s words, ideas or 
data as one’s own work. When a student submits work for credit 
that includes the words, ideas or data of others, the source of that 
information must be acknowledged through complete and accurate 
documentation, and specific footnote references, and, if verbatim 
statements are included, through quotation marks as well. By 
placing his/her name on work submitted for credit, the student 
certifies the originality of all work not otherwise identified by 
appropriate acknowledgments.
A student will avoid being charged with plagiarism if there is an 
acknowledgment of indebtedness. 
EXAMPLES (Including but not limited to):
1.	 Whenever one quotes another person’s actual words.
2.	 Whenever one paraphrases another person’s idea, opinion or 
theory; and
3.	 Whenever one borrows facts, statistics, or other illustrative 
materials, unless the information is common knowledge.
Fabrication 
Fabrication is the use of invented information or the falsification 
of research or other findings with the intent to deceive.
EXAMPLES (Including but not limited to):
1.	 Citing information not taken from the source indicated.
2.	 Listing sources in a bibliography not used in the academic 
exercise.
3.	 Inventing data or source information for research or other 
academic exercise. 
4.	 Submitting as your own any academic exercise (e.g., written 
work, documentation or legal document [e.g., patient charts, etc.], 
painting, sculpture, etc.) prepared totally or in part by another.
5.	 Taking a test for someone else or permitting someone else to 
take a test for you.
6.	 Collaborating with another person or external entity to 
participate in a discussion activity in an online course.
7.	 Paying for a Web service to provide answers for online 
homework and exams.
8.	 Paying for a Web service to complete an online course.
Cheating 
Cheating is an act of deception by which a student misrepresents 
that he/she has mastered information on an academic exercise that 
he/she has not mastered.
EXAMPLES (including but not limited to): 
1.	 Copying from another student’s test paper and/or other assign-
ments.
2.	 Actively facilitating another student’s copying from one’s own 
	
test paper/other assignments.
3.	 Using the course textbook or other materials such as a notebook
	
not authorized for use during a test.
19
Academic Regulations
4.	 Collaborating during a test with any other person by receiving
	
information without authority.
5.	 Using specifically prepared and unauthorized materials or
 	 equipment during a test, e.g., notes, formula lists, notes written 
	
on student’s clothing, etc.
6.	 Reporting a clinical visit completed when it was not.
7.	 Falsifying reports of clinical visits, laboratory exercises, or field
 	 experiences.
8.	 Utilizing cheating devices and any other technology to 
	
communicate question content and answers with another
	
person during the administration of an exam.
9.	 Performing web searches for answers during an online exam.
10.	Collaborating with another person or external service to
	
participate in a discussion activity or exam in an online course.
Academic Misconduct 
Academic misconduct is the tampering with grades or taking part 
in obtaining or distributing any part of a test not administered.
EXAMPLES (including but not limited to):
1.	 Stealing, buying or otherwise obtaining all or part of an 
unadministered test.
2.	 Selling or giving away all or part of an unadministered test 
including answers to an unadministered test.
3.	 Bribing any other person to obtain an unadministered test or 
any information about the test.
4.	 Entering a building, office file or computer/computer system 
for the purpose of changing a grade in a grade book, on a test, 
or on other work for which a grade is given.
5.	 Changing, altering, or being an accessory to the changing and/
or altering of a grade in a grade book, on a test, a “change of 
grade” form, or other official academic records of the University 
which relate to grades.
6.	 Entering a building, office, file, or computer/computer 	system 
for the purpose of obtaining an unadministered test.
7.	 Hiding and/or mutilating library/classroom books and/or 
equipment.
8.	 Taking an online exam or quiz early to share question content 
with other students.
9.	 Sharing Blackboard or Gannon user ID login information with 
another person or external entity to submit or share class work.
II. Academic Dishonesty Procedure
1.	 If an instructor suspects that a student has violated Gannon 
University’s Code of Academic Integrity, he/she will promptly 
notify the student involved as well as the department chair 
responsible for the course in question. At no time during 
the investigation or appeal process are students permitted to 
withdraw from the course. Within 10 calendar days of the 
discovery of the alleged violation the instructor will notify the 
student of the allegation and invite the student to meet to review 
the matter and to explain the alleged violation. If the student 
chooses to meet with the instructor to contest the allegation, 
this meeting shall be scheduled within 7 calendar days of the 
notification.
2.	 If the student is cleared of the allegation, the matter will be 
dropped. If not, then the instructor will inform the Dean’s 
Office of the violation. (The Dean’s Office to be notified is the 
one responsible for the course.) This Office shall then inform 
the instructor of the student’s number of previous violations 
of the academic integrity policy, if any. In consultation with 
the department chair the instructor will then impose a sanction 
upon the student. A letter detailing the sanction will be sent to 
the student from the instructor and copied to the three College 
Deans. The letter shall be sent within 10 calendar days from 
the date the Dean was notified. The student should be aware 
that admission of guilt does not eliminate or lessen the sanction 
imposed by the instructor.
3.	 The student may appeal the instructor’s decision to the Dean of 
the College in which the course resides. Appeals must be made 
within 7 calendar days of the date of the instructor’s decision. 
Students are expected to continue to attend class during the 
appeal process. 
4.	 A hearing will be scheduled within 10 calendar days of the 
Dean receiving the student’s appeal. The hearing will include 
the Dean, the instructor, and the student. The instructor will 
present pertinent evidence and the student will be given the 
opportunity to challenge the evidence and present a defense. 
The student may have one guest present during the hearing, 
but the guest is not allowed to speak during the hearing unless 
permitted by the Dean. The Dean will issue a finding based upon 
the evidence presented. If the Dean determines that insufficient 
evidence has been presented, the matter will be dropped. If the 
Dean finds the student in violation of the Code of Academic 
Integrity, he/she may support the academic sanction originally 
imposed by the instructor. The Dean also has the power to issue 
administrative sanctions [i.e., separation from the University]). 
In considering the penalty to be imposed, the Dean shall consider 
the evidence of the appeal proceeding as well as any documented 
previous infraction(s). A letter detailing the sanction will be 
sent to the student from the Dean and copied to the other two 
College Deans.
5.	 Following the Dean’s decision, the student has 7 calendar days 
to make a final appeal to the Provost with respect to the fairness 
of the proceedings and/or the appropriateness of the sanction. 
The Provost will issue a decision within 7 calendar days of the 
appeal. Students are expected to continue attending class during 
the appeal process. A final letter will be sent to the student from 
the Provost and copied to the three College Deans. (NOTE: At 
the Dean’s or Provost’s discretion, exceptions to the calendar 
day requirements can be made for unusual circumstances such 
as Christmas or summer breaks).
6.	 Once all appeals are exhausted and a final decision has been 
made the Dean’s office responsible for the course will report 
the finding of academic dishonesty to each of the other 
Academic Deans.
 
20
Academic Dishonesty Sanctions 
Any student found guilty of academic dishonesty will be subject 
to penalties, which, depending on the gravity of the offense, may 
include the following:
1.	 A grade of ‘‘zero” for the assignment involved (as imposed by 
the instructor in consultation with the department chair). This 
penalty will generally be applied in the case of a student’s first 
offense. However, the instructor has the right to impose a more 
severe penalty based on the circumstances of the offense.
2.	 Failure of the course (as imposed by the instructor in consultation 
with the department chair). This penalty will generally be applied 
in the case of a student’s second documented offense. However, 
the instructor has the right to impose a lesser penalty based on 
the circumstances of the offense.
3.	 Subject to review and approval of the Dean responsible for 
the course, separation from the University. This penalty will 
generally be applied in the case of a student’s third documented 
offense. However, the Dean has the latitude to apply a lesser 
penalty depending on the circumstances of the offense.
 
Review and Expunging of Records 
1.	 Records of completed disciplinary proceedings are destroyed if 
the student is acquitted.
2.	 Records of the completed disciplinary proceedings are 
maintained by the Academic Dean’s Office if the student is 
found guilty. The records are maintained for a period of three 
years after the student leaves or graduates from the University.
III. Policy on Professional Integrity
All students have an obligation to maintain ethical behavior in 
relationship to their profession.
Professional Behavior
Those behaviors reflecting status, character, and standards of the 
given profession. 
 
Ethical Behavior
Those behaviors in accordance with the accepted principles of right 
and wrong that govern the conduct of a profession.
Any student at Gannon University who engages in unprofessional 
or unethical conduct is subject to disciplinary action which could 
include reprimand, probation, separation and expulsion from the 
University.
IV. Sources
Robert M. Gorell and Charlton Laird, Modern English Handbook, 
6th Edition (Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1976), p. 71.
Campus Rules and Moral Community; In Place of In Loco Parentis 
by David A. Hoekema. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield 
Publishers, Inc., 1994.
The format and definitions for the policy on Academic Integrity 
were adapted from the “Academic Honesty and Dishonesty” 
brochure produced by the College of Health Sciences, Gannon 
University, Erie, PA 16541.
The format and definitions for the policy on Academic Integrity 
were adapted from the School of Hotel Administration, Code of 
Academic Integrity, and Cornell University.
Student Academic  
Grievance Policy
Scope and Purpose:
1.	 This policy addresses academic grievances only. An academic 
grievance is defined as a complaint brought by a student 
regarding the University’s provision of education and academic 
(only) services affecting their role as a student. Complaints or 
grievances connected to assigned grades represent a special case 
to the grievance process. Grading reflects careful and deliberate 
assessment of a student’s performance by a faculty member. As 
such, the substance of grading decisions may not be delegated 
to the grievance process.
	
Nevertheless, the University recognizes that in rare cases the 
process of grading may be subject to error or injustice. Therefore, 
a student who alleges an error or injustice in the grading process 
would follow this policy toward resolution.
2.	 This policy does not apply to student complaints regarding 
employment or alleged violations of other policies in the student 
handbook.
3.	 It is the intent that this policy to provide an efficient process, 
allowing for both informal and formal resolution of grievances 
related to academic concerns, complaints, or allegations.
4.	 A student must initiate a grievance as close as possible to the date 
of the occurrence of the incident and no later than 45 days after 
the end of the semester in which the alleged grievance occurred. 
The three summer sessions are considered as one semester.
General Guidelines
Academic grievance procedures should be kept as informal as 
possible based on principles of mediation and conciliation. Every 
reasonable effort should be made to resolve any academic grievance 
at the lowest organizational level possible. In the event that it cannot 
be resolved informally, the student may seek resolution at the next 
higher level according to the Formal Resolution procedure.
If the faculty member is no longer employed by the University 
or is not available within the timelines specified in these general 
guidelines, the student is to initiate the complaint with the faculty 
member’s immediate supervisor.
21
Student Academic Grievance Policy
The student filing a grievance may have a third-party advisor, such 
as the University Ombudsperson; attend any meeting at which the 
student appears. The faculty member involved in the grievance may 
also have a third-party advisor approved by the University attend 
any meeting at which the faculty member appears. Legal counsel 
shall not be used by either party in this grievance process.
Informal Resolution Phase
All academic grievances begin with the informal resolution phase. 
This first step toward resolution of an academic grievance should 
begin at the lowest organizational level. The student and the 
faculty member or University colleague involved should meet to 
discuss and work toward resolution of the concern. The student 
should address the grievance to the faculty member or University 
colleague involved as soon as possible. The student should follow 
the established protocol regarding the levels of appeal. Formal 
resolution shall not occur without occurrence of the informal 
resolution phase.
The student may contact the University Ombudsperson for 
assistance in initiating the academic grievance process or at any 
time during the process.
Formal Resolution Phase
The formal resolution phase is used by the student when a 
satisfactory informal resolution has not occurred.
1.	 The first step in the formal resolution of an academic grievance 
is to submit a formal written account of the grievance to the 
appropriate immediate supervisor. Students may consult the 
Human Resources office to determine the appropriate supervisor.
	
a.	 The written account must be submitted to the immediate 
supervisor within two weeks after the last meeting of the 
informal resolution phase.
	
b.	 The written account should include identification of the 
grievant, the respondent, the incident – date, time, place, 
names of witnesses, the existing rule/policy/established 
practice claimed to be violated and a brief statement of the 
desired outcome.
	
c.	 Within three weeks of receipt of all written materials, 
the appropriate immediate supervisor will fact-find from 
involved parties and render a decision in writing via 
registered mail to the parties involved.
2.	 The second step, if needed, in the formal resolution phase 
occurs when and if the faculty or student is not satisfied with the 
immediate supervisor’s resolution of the grievance. The student 
or the faculty member or University colleague involved may then 
appeal to the next level of the organizational chart by providing 
a written account of the grievance process and decision.
	
a.	 A written account must be submitted to the next level of 
the organizational chart within two weeks of receipt of the 
decision rendered by the immediate supervisor (Step 1).
	
b.	 The written account should include identification of the 
grievant, the respondent, the incident – date, time, place, 
names of witnesses, the existing rule/policy/established 
practice claimed to be violated, a copy of the decision of the 
immediate supervisor and a brief statement of the desired 
outcome.
	
c.	 Within three weeks of receipt of all written materials, the 
next level of the organizational chart will fact-find from 
involved parties and render a resolution in writing to the 
parties involved.
3.	 The third step, if needed, in the formal resolution process is to 
appeal to the appropriate College Dean.
	
a.	 The College Dean shall be given a written account of the 
grievance process to date. This must be submitted within 
two weeks of receipt of the resolution decision rendered by 
the next person on the organizational chart (Step 2).
	
b.	 The College Dean shall render a decision in writing to the 
parties involved within three weeks.
	
c.	 In the event the Dean’s resolution of the alleged academic 
grievance is not satisfactory to either party, the appeal shall 
be directed to the Provost and Vice President for Student 
Experience.
4.	 The fourth step, if needed, in the formal resolution process is to 
appeal to the Provost and Vice President for Student Experience. 
This step must be initiated within two weeks of receipt of the 
College Dean’s decision.
	
a.	 The Provost and Vice President for Student Experience shall 
review the written appeal and response(s) to decide whether 
there are sufficient grounds to hold an appeal hearing.
	
b.	 If there are insufficient grounds to hold an appeal hearing, 
the decision of the College Dean will be upheld.
	
c.	 If there are sufficient grounds to hold an appeal hearing, 
the Provost and Vice President for Student Experience shall 
establish an ad hoc grievance appeal panel.
	
	 	 –		 A grievance appeal hearing panel would be established on 
an ad hoc basis and consist of five members for each case. 
The grievance appeal hearing panel shall be convened by 
the Provost and Vice President for Student Experience. 
The panel shall be composed of the Provost and Vice 
President for Student Experience, or her/his designee 
(serves as Chair), two faculty representatives chosen 
from the Faculty Senate, and two student representatives 
chosen from the Student Government Association. The 
Provost and Vice President for Student Experience, or 
her/his designee shall have a vote only in event of a tie.
	
	 	 –		 The panel members shall conduct the business of the 
appeal in strict confidence, and in private. The meetings 
and deliberations of the panel shall be closed.
	
	 	 –		 The panel members shall have access to the written appeals 
and each person involved in the grievance.
	
	 	 –		 The panel decision shall be communicated in writing to 
the student, faculty member, College Dean, and program 
director.
22
	
	 	 –		 The decision of the grievance appeal panel must be 
submitted in writing by registered mail to both parties. 
This communication should include an opportunity for 
a member of the panel or the Provost and Vice President 
for Student Experience to debrief or otherwise provide 
further assistance to either party.
	
	 	 –		 The decision of the grievance appeal panel is final.
Transcript Policy
Students may request official copies of their transcripts for a variety 
of purposes and through various methods, including electronic and 
printed delivery to other institutions, workplaces, oneself, or others.
Students may visit the Registrar’s Office website to request official 
transcripts. Gannon University has authorized Parchment to fulfill 
transcript orders for a small free.
Students have the option to request transcripts immediately, or to 
hold the fulfillment of the request for either of two future dates:
1.	 When grades for the semester are completely submitted 
(generally within one week of finals).
2.	 Once the student has graduated. This should be complete within 
30 days of the Commencement ceremony, once the Dean’s 
Office and academic program staff have confirmed the student 
met the requirements of the degree.
For a transcript to be official, it must be delivered directly from 
the Registrar’s Office via Parchment to the party requested. All 
transcripts given directly to the student will be stamped ‘Issued 
directly to the student’ and may not be accepted as official. 
Transcripts are not released for students with financial holds.
Official transcripts of credit earned at other institutions which 
have been presented for admission or evaluation of credit and 
have become a part of the student’s permanent record in this office 
are not reissued or copies duplicated for distribution. Transcripts 
from other institutions must be official and received by Gannon 
University directly from the original institution(s). Copies issued 
to the students with the college seal will not be accepted. This also 
applies to high school transcripts. Transferred credit is not added 
to the Gannon University transcript unless it is applicable toward 
a degree at Gannon University. Transfer grades are not put on the 
Gannon transcript.
Students may view, save, and print an unofficial copy of their 
transcript at any time through Self-Service in the Academics menu 
on the left.
Access to Student Records
In accordance with the 1975 Family Educational Rights and Privacy 
Act, the University has established a policy concerning access to 
student records. The full policy is available upon request from the 
Registrar’s Office. The following items are included here because 
of their general interest:
•   Probation and suspension letters, and other correspondence are 
sent directly to all students at their home address.
•   Access to student records is permitted only upon receipt of a 
written release by the student.
•   Students may have access to parental financial records  
submitted in support of financial aid applications.
•   With certain exceptions, each student has access to his or her 
personal and academic records.
•   Students may request that directory information not be released 
to anyone.
Making the Decision to Withdraw 
The decision to withdraw or take a temporary withdrawal from 
classes is an important one that may have future academic and 
financial implications. You must seriously evaluate the short and 
long-term benefits and consequences of this decision. Choosing to 
withdraw from the university may also influence your permanent 
student record, so it is important that the formal withdrawal process 
is completed. 
We understand that this is a difficult time, and we will assist you 
through the process.
Be sure to discuss your options with a faculty member +/or the 
program director/chair so that all available options have been 
explored, including reducing full-time credit load, reducing credit 
load to part-time, or changing your major. All students encounter 
varying levels of stress and some routinely face hardships. 
All options should be discussed before 
a decision is made.
Options and Procedures:
1.	 Medical Withdrawal for Mental Health Reason:
	
Academic stress, financial difficulties, problems in life, learning 
disabilities, and some chronic mental health problems can be 
managed with ongoing treatment and alone are not considered 
sufficient justification for a medical withdrawal.
	
Requests for medical withdrawal for mental health reasons 
must have supporting documentation from a licensed mental 
health professional (psychiatrist or psychologist). 
	
•		 The student must complete the Medical Withdrawal form. 
This is available from the student’s advisor or in the Student 
Success Center.
23
Making the Decision to Withdraw
	
•		 Written documentation on the mental health’s professional 
letterhead must include diagnosis, date of onset, treatment 
history, current status, recommendations for treatment, and 
recommendations for leave of absence from university 
coursework. 
	
•		 The student must submit this documentation to the Student 
Success Center, who will then send it to the Counseling 
Services office. This documentation will be maintained 
confidentially in this office.
	
•		 Release of Information Authorization Form must also be 
completed.
Refunds of tuition, fees, room, and board are handled on a case-
by-case basis. It is important that the student fully understands the 
impact of this decision on current and future financial aid, loans, 
debt, or scholarships. It is the student’s responsibility to discuss 
financial matters with the Cashier’s and Financial Aid offices.
A medical withdrawal for a mental health reason is granted with 
the expectation that the student will seek immediate treatment for 
the diagnosis that led to the withdrawal. 
When a student is granted a medical withdrawal, and upon 
approval of the Dean of the College, the academic transcript will 
be marked with “X’s” (withdrawal from course grade) for each 
course attempted.
Re-admission to the program/university is only considered when 
documentation from a mental health professional supports this 
action AND includes administrative and academic department 
review. Additional expectations (interview, behavioral action plan, 
academic performance, treatment follow-up) may be outlined and 
re-admission is not guaranteed.
2.	 Medical Withdrawal for Physical Health Reason:
	
Requests for medical withdrawal for physical health reasons 
must have supporting documentation from a licensed physician. 
	
•		 The student must complete the Medical Withdrawal form. 
This is available from the advisor or in the Student Success 
Center.
	
•		 Written documentation on the medical health’s professional 
letterhead must include diagnosis, date of onset, treatment 
history, current status, recommendations for treatment, and 
recommendations for leave of absence from university 
coursework. 
	
•		 The student must submit this documentation to the Student 
Success Center. This documentation will be maintained 
securely in this office.
Refunds of tuition, fees, room, and board are handled on a case-
by-case basis. It is important that the student fully understands the 
impact of this decision on current and future financial aid, loans, 
debt, or scholarships. It is the student’s responsibility to discuss 
financial matters with the Cashier’s and Financial Aid offices.
A medical withdrawal for a physical health reason is granted with 
the expectation that the student will seek immediate treatment for 
the diagnosis that led to the withdrawal. 
When a student is granted a medical withdrawal, and upon 
approval of the Dean of the College, the academic transcript will 
be marked with “X’s” (withdrawal from course grade) for each 
course attempted.
Re-admission to the program/university is only considered when 
documentation from a medical health professional supports this 
action AND includes administrative and academic department 
review. Additional expectations (interview, physical restrictions, 
academic performance, treatment follow-up) may be outlined and 
re-admission is not guaranteed.
3.	 Temporary Withdrawal  
(Up to two semesters, based on program):
	
Requests for withdrawal for up to two full time semesters of 
coursework must follow university and program policy and 
procedures. 
	
•		 The student must complete the withdrawal form following 
discussion with advisor/program director/chair. The form is 
available from your advisor or in the Student Success Center.
	
•		 The student must submit the form to the program director/
chair for signature. 
	
•		 Exit interviews and signatures are required with Cashier’s 
office, Financial Aid office and Registrar’s office.
	
•		 When applicable, interviews and signatures may be required 
with Residence Life and Global Support offices.
The university refund policy for tuition, fees, room and board 
is followed for ALL withdrawals. When students withdraw, 
they should refer to the Academic Calendar for the last day 
to withdraw from a course in order to receive withdrawal (X) 
grades. Withdrawal after this date will result in ‘F’ grades 
unless permission is granted by the student’s College Dean. 
Refer to graduate catalog or schedule for refund percentages.
Readmission will be up to the student’s specific department/
program and will be subject to scheduling and course availability. 
4.	 Complete Withdrawal from University:
	
Requests for complete withdrawal from the university must 
follow university and program policy and procedures. 
	
•		 The student must complete the withdrawal form following 
discussion with advisor/program director/chair. The form is 
available from your advisor or in the Student Success Center.
24
	
•		 The student must submit the form to the program director/
chair for signature. 
	
•		 Exit interviews and signatures are required with Cashier’s 
office, Financial Aid office and Registrar’s office.
	
•		 When applicable, interviews and signatures may be required 
with Residence Life and Global Support offices.
The university refund policy for tuition, fees, room and board 
is followed for ALL withdrawals. When students withdraw, 
they should refer to the Academic Calendar for the last day 
to withdraw from a course to receive withdrawal (X) grades. 
Withdrawal after this date will result in ‘F’ grades unless 
permission is granted by the student’s College Dean. Refer to 
graduate catalog or schedule for refund percentages.
Readmission to the University and/or specific majors/
programs will be subject to admission guidelines and dates for 
readmission. Consideration will be up to the major/program 
as well as course availability. Readmission to the University or 
program is not guaranteed.
International students: 
International students transferring, withdrawing, or taking a 
temporary withdrawal from the university must contact the Office 
of Global Support and Student Engagement to discuss immigration 
status and document the process in SEVIS.
Change of Instructional 
Delivery Method
The University may be required to close some or all of its facilities 
and services, including academic buildings, recreational buildings 
and opportunities, dormitories, food halls, sporting events, etc., in 
response to public health emergencies, governmental orders, and/or 
other circumstances that impact the University’s ability to provide 
an in-person, on campus education and experience.
The University therefore retains discretion over the manner and 
method of course delivery, including the discretion and ability 
to transition courses, labs, etc., to alternate delivery methods 
including, but not limited to, remote/distance education and/or 
remote asynchronous learning.
The Library
Course:
GLIBR 500: AI and the Information Literacy Imperative
This course acquaints students with information literacy implica-
tions of AI (generative artificial intelligence). It examines: AI’s 
potentially positive and negative consequences in major societal 
sectors; responsibility of current and prospective leaders and 
professionals to effectively utilize AI; AI/information literacy 
relationship, including implications for higher education students.
The Msgr. Wilfrid J. Nash Library and Student Learning Commons 
is a dynamic and engaging learning environment that provides 
resources, spaces, and support to students at Gannon University 
to foster learning and academic success.
Nash Library’s collections contain over 200,000 book volumes 
and more than 3,000 audiovisual items. Special collections include 
the University Archives. The library provides online access to 
over 45 databases, 80,000 periodicals, and 250,000 ebooks. Other 
learning resources such as laptops and anatomical models are 
also available for checkout. Research assistance and information 
literacy instruction are also integral components of the library’s 
educational mission.
The STEM Center and Writing and Research Center are also located 
within the building to provide individual and course-integrated 
group tutoring both online and in-person.
Nash Library and Student Learning Commons opened in spring of 
2018 after an extensive modernization project. The building con-
tains spaces for quiet study as well as spaces for collaborative work. 
There are 49 study rooms in a variety of sizes and configurations 
designed to accommodate 2 to 10 students. Urban Brew, a new café 
with its own distinctive menu, is also located in Nash. The library 
is open 104.5 hours per week during the Fall and Spring semesters.
Student Services
All enrollment services at Gannon University are available to 
students on campus and online. These enrollment services in-
clude course registration, student financial aid, student accounts 
and billing.
Gannon students can purchase books, supplies, and apparel from 
the Gannon bookstore in Erie at the Palumbo Academic Center 
located at 824 Peach Street. Students are also able to order books, 
supplies, and apparel from the Gannon bookstore online. When 
ordering textbooks on www.gannon.bkstr.com, students can 
purchase new or used books to be shipped to their residence or for 
store pickup. Books ordered online may be filled by one of over 
900 Follett stores or from the Follett distribution center in Chicago. 
The bookstore website lists all of Gannon’s offerings each semester 
with corresponding text information.
25
Academic Computing
The mission of Gannon’s Information Technology Services (ITS) 
department is to provide the technology infrastructure and tools 
to enhance the productivity of students, faculty and staff. Students 
who have specific needs or problems can contact the ITS Helpdesk 
24 hours a day at (814) 871-7501 or online at my.gannon.edu. 
This information is provided to the students in the new student 
orientation, registration information as well as published at the 
bottom of each Blackboard screen.
Gannon’s Student Success Center provides support services, 
including academic advising, career counseling, tutoring, 
programming, and resources for campus and distance students 
attending the University. 
Professionally trained peer consultants who reflect respect for 
the individual writer staff the Writing Center in the Student 
Success Center. Consultations promote the recognition of an 
elemental rhetorical situation, the ability to understand and apply 
corrections, and the stimulation of critical thinking. The Writing 
Center consultants have a strong commitment to service and regard 
language as fundamental to the holistic development of the Gannon 
University student. 
Math and Writing Centers are located at the Palumbo Academic 
Center, 824 Peach Street. Both Centers offer synchronous tutoring 
services available online. Tutoring is facilitated over the phone and 
through the Web. Appointments can be made from any Internet-
connected computer or mobile device. 
Career Services and academic advising are also available to students 
on campus and from a distance.
Office of Accessibility Services
Gannon University, in compliance with the Americans with 
Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation 
Act, and related state and federal legislation, provides responsible 
advocacy, reasonable accommodations, and support services 
to students with disabilities who present current and proper 
documentation of disability to the Office of Disability Services. 
Accommodations may include, but are not limited to, extended time 
on exams, reduced distraction environment, notetaking support, 
and reader/scribe for exams.
Students requesting Gannon housing accommodations, must begin 
the process through the Office of Accessibility Services. Students 
may contact the Director of the Office of Accessibility Services 
(OAS) by calling 814-871-5522, email ods@gannon.edu, or in 
person by visiting the OAS located within the Student Success 
Center in the Palumbo Academic Center (PC 1025).
Academic Computing
Gannon University seeks to provide state-of-the-art computing, 
networking, and instructional technology to its students, faculty, 
and staff. 
The campus currently offers:
•	 wireless access to Gannon’s network and the Internet in all 
campus buildings.
•	 close to 100% of classrooms equipped with instructional 
technology.
•	 an online learning management system to provide an enhanced 
classroom environment.
•	 general computer labs in Academic buildings throughout 
campus;
•	 virtual access to specific lab applications so you can access them 
on your personal computer or mobile device from anywhere in 
the world.
•	 each student is provided 600 print pages a semester to print in 
computer labs throughout campus.
•	 MS Office 365 (full versions of Word, Excel, One Note, 
PowerPoint, etc) is available to students at no charge.
•	 labs and classrooms with equipment geared to specific  
discipline requirements in several departments including 
Biology, Business, Chemistry, Computer Science, Health 
Sciences, Communications, Mechanical Engineering, and 
Electrical Engineering.
•	 access to view your tuition bill, grades, schedule, and  
transcript as well as view available courses and schedule online. 
You can also print your academic evaluation, register, or drop 
classes online.
•	 a debit card used on campus at all dining locations, library, 
bookstore, special events, and at many off-campus vendors.
26
GRADUATE PROGRAMS, 
DEPARTMENTS AND COURSES
Anti-Money 
Laundering 
Certificate – 
Online
Program Director: Benjamin Baughman, Ph.D.
INTRODUCTION
The graduate certificate in Anti-Money Laundering (AML) is 
based on compliance requirements and guidelines from US and 
international laws and regulations, and international organizations. 
The program is designed from the risk-based approach that is 
identifying and rating the money laundering risk, developing 
compliance programs and rating its effectiveness, calculating the 
residual risk, and designating necessary sources to mitigate the risk. 
It provides the essential knowledge and capabilities for working 
professionals and non-working individuals who want to develop 
themselves with the expertise in the AML professional field.
The curriculum and learning objectives are aligned with current 
AML and financial crime certifications offered by professional 
associations. AML is a 12-credit certificate program that can be 
completed in one year. Courses will be offered in a 7-week format. 
The certificate is delivered online. The length of the program will 
be two semesters by taking two courses per semester.
CERTIFICATE OUTCOMES
After the certificate, the participants will be able to:
1.	 Describe the theoretical and foundational applications of money 
laundering and terrorism financing process and create a money 
laundering case report.
2.	 Identify and compare the roles of national and international anti-
money laundering laws, regulations, and standards and build an 
AML compliance program/regime/system in sectoral, national, 
regional, and global level. 
3.	 Assess money laundering and terrorism financing risk in terms of 
customer, geographic location, products and delivery channels, 
and create a risk assessment report for financial sectors and 
countries.
4.	 Analyze the essential elements of AML program/regime/system 
and develop recommendations about how effectively AML 
program/regime/system would be strengthened to successfully 
mitigate the risk.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GAML 502 Anti-Money Laundering
3 credits
This course emphasizes monitoring, detecting, reporting and 
prevention of money laundering (ML). It explores the foundations 
of AML, national and international laws and regulations, conducting 
and supporting investigation processes, and compliance, sanctions 
and regulatory developments. Students will develop analytical and 
practical skills of examining failures/vulnerabilities of the AML 
system which will help build an effective AML compliance system
GAML 503 Risk Assessment and Management
3 credits
This course is designed to provide students with important 
components of AML risk governance structure, essentials of AML 
risk-based approach, practical skills of how to build a country 
level and financial sectoral level risk assessment report, and how 
to manage the residual money laundering risk.
27
Applied Exercise Science
GAML 605 Counterterrorism Financing
3 credits
The 9/11 terrorist attacks brought significant financial and security 
challenges to policymakers for the formulation of the policy 
solutions for countering terrorism. The governmental efforts, aka 
treasury war, against terrorist financing made counterterrorism 
financing an essential part of the AML field. This course is designed 
to provide students with the knowledge of how terrorism works, 
how terrorist organizations move their funds, and how to build an 
effective CTF compliance regime. 
GAML 606 Cryptocurrency
3 credits
To deal with the new complexities of cryptocurrency (its usage 
and transaction, and identify, investigate, and prevent money 
laundering risk emerged from it), new practical skills and 
expertise about cryptocurrency and blockchain technology should 
be developed. This course is designed to provide students with 
essential concepts of cryptocurrency and blockchain technology, 
and additional knowledge, skills, expertise, and perspective of 
how to develop an effective AML compliance program to manage 
cryptocurrency risks. 
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1.	 Completion of an undergraduate degree with a 2.5 QGPA or 
better from an accredited college or university. 
2.	 TOEFL/other scores if English is not the first language
3.	 There are no prerequisite course requirements for the graduate 
certificate in Anti-Money Laundering.
4.	 Completed graduate application
5.	 Official academic transcripts from all prior institutions. 
Applied Exercise 
Science
Chairperson: Kory Stauffer, Ph.D.
MISSION STATEMENT
Our mission in the Department of Applied Exercise Science is to 
instill in our students the knowledge, skills and abilities that make 
them leaders in the promotion of safe, active and healthy lifestyle 
behaviors. Through professional preparation of both undergraduate 
and graduate students in exercise, sport and associated fields, our 
exceptional faculty strive for distinction in our respective fields at 
the local, regional, and national level. We pursue this goal through 
active engagement in novel and applied research activities that 
involve both undergraduate and graduate students, through assisting 
students in making connections between theoretical concepts and 
real-life applications, through fostering a positive, engaging, and 
interactive learning environment, through the active promotion 
of advanced-level educational opportunities and through active 
participation in local and regional community health initiatives. 
It is with these initiatives in mind that we design our curriculum, 
advise our student body, and guide our departmental activities.
Master of Science  
in Sport and Exercise Science
Concentration: Human Performance  
and Clinical Physiology
Program Director: J. David Mosinski, Ph.D.
INTRODUCTION
Students in our Master of Science in Applied Exercise Physiology 
program receive advanced training in human performance 
consisting of knowledge, skills and abilities in biochemistry, 
nutrition, psychology, physiology, and sport and clinical exercise 
physiology. Additionally, students can choose either a thesis 
or a non-thesis option. In the thesis option, students complete 
30 credits of coursework as well as 6 credits of research-based 
scientific study that will prepare them for mid-level employment 
in the field and/or entrance into doctoral programs should they 
choose to continue their education beyond the master level. In 
the non-thesis option, students complete 30 credits of coursework 
followed by 6 credits of an academic-year-long internship, many 
with one of the University’s athletic teams or Semi-Professional 
sports teams in Erie, as well as local hospitals and rehabilitation 
facilities to provide students with a variety of clinical experiences 
with a concentration in Human Performance. This M.S. degree is 
a 36 credit-hour program that is designed to be completed in one 
calendar year. Students can expect to receive advanced education 
28
in many facets of human performance including the physiological, 
biomechanical, nutritional, and psychological factors that both 
enhance and limit our movement capabilities. The program offers 
two-degree options: a thesis option, and a non-thesis, year-long 
internship option. Classes are offered in the morning in the summer, 
and in the afternoon, evening and online during the fall and spring 
semesters to accommodate working students. A part-time option is 
available for students who are unable to devote the time necessary 
to attend on a full-time basis. The program is designed to prepare 
students for gainful employment and/or further graduate training.
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES
The curriculum for the Master of Science degree is designed around 
providing the student with an advanced, well-balanced, and applied 
educational experience. Upon graduating with a Master of Science 
degree in Applied Exercise Physiology from Gannon University, 
the student will
•	 Students will demonstrate advanced knowledge of the 
neurophysiology of human performance and clinical populations. 
•	 Students will demonstrate advanced knowledge of the 
physiology of human function and performance.
•	 Students will demonstrate advanced knowledge of the 
psychology of human performance. 
•	 Students will apply and demonstrate advanced knowledge of 
the relationship between nutrition and human performance. 
•	 Students will utilize and demonstrate advanced knowledge on 
testing the physical capabilities of the body and prescribing 
activity to improve those parameters.
•	 Students will demonstrate leadership and expertise in the field 
of advanced human performance.
ACCREDITATION
The Master of Science in Sport and Exercise Science is accredited 
by the Commission on Accreditation of Allied Health Education 
Programs (www.caahep.org) upon the recommendation of the 
Committee on Accreditation for the Exercise Sciences (CoAES) 
and CAAHEP’s Board of Directors.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
•	 Earned a four-year degree from a regionally accredited college 
or university. 
•	 GPA of at least 2.75 on a 4.0 scale in undergraduate coursework. 
Performance in prior graduate work will be considered. 
•	 Successful applicants will have preparation in the sciences 
that may include coursework in biology, chemistry, physics, 
mathematics, anatomy/physiology and/or exercise physiology. 
•	 2 letters of recommendation. Letters can be personal (Coach/
Mentor), professional (Boss/Supervisor) or academic (Professor/
Advisor). (1 academic required)
•	 A 750 word essay (describe personal goals and how this degree 
will help you pursue them)
•	 Current Resume/CV
•	 Successful interview with at least two members of the admissions 
committee
ADMISSIONS PROCESS
Candidates will be considered on a rolling basis for the summer 
cohort of the calendar year for which they are applying. On special 
occasion, students may be considered for fall or spring semester 
entry. Students will be required to submit an official transcript 
along with the standard graduate school application as well as three 
letters of recommendation. Students will be notified of admissions 
decisions after review by the department admissions committee.
DEGREE COMPLETION OPTION: THESIS
Students choosing the thesis option will complete 30 credits 
of coursework as well as 6 credits of research-based, faculty 
supervised, scientific study that will culminate in the preparation 
and defense of the master’s thesis, a requirement for graduation. 
This option prepares the student not only for mid-level employment 
in the field but also entrance into doctoral programs should they 
choose to continue their education beyond the master’s level. 
Students will use the first summer session to review current research 
in the field and to develop a research question of their own. The fall 
and spring will consist of development, preparation and defense 
of the master’s thesis. While this is certainly an aggressive time 
frame, provisions are in place that will allow students to extend 
their graduate program until the thesis project is completed.
DEGREE COMPLETION OPTION: INTERNSHIP
In the non-thesis option, students will complete 30 credit hours of 
coursework as well as 6 credits of an academic-year-long internship, 
many with one of the University’s athletic teams or a clinical 
site of their choosing. Under the supervision of both members of 
the faculty as well as the coaching staff of their respective team 
or clinical site coordinator, the student intern will serve in the 
capacity of strength and conditioning coach on their respective 
teams or exercise/rehabilitation specialist at their clinical site. 
Students will assist in the design, implementation, maintenance, 
and assessment of the team’s conditioning activities. NOTE: It 
is required that students have at least attempted, and preferably 
successfully completed certification requirements through either 
the National Strength and Conditioning Association (Certified 
Strength and Conditioning Specialist) or the American College of 
Sports Medicine (Health and Fitness Specialist) prior to starting 
their internship experience. Both of these certification exams are 
available in a computer-based format that allows for immediate 
results. Both also require a fee that will be the responsibility of the 
student upon registration.
29
Applied Exercise Science
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
FULL TIME ENROLLMENT
SUMMER – 12 credits	
GSPRT 522	
Exercise Testing and Prescription  
in Clinical Populations	
3
GSPRT 510	
Advanced Strength and Conditioning	
3 
GSPRT 520 	 Advanced Laboratory Techniques	
3 
GSPRT 530	
Research Methods and Statistics in  
Human Performance	
3
FALL – 12 credits	
GSPRT 540 	 Psychological Foundations of Performance	
3 
GSPRT 550 	 Advanced Sport Nutrition	
3
GSPRT 562	
Cardiopulmonary Physiology	
3
GSPRT 600 	 Thesis I or GSPRT 602 Internship I	
3
SPRING – 12 credits	
GSPRT 573	
Exercise Pharmacology	
3
GSPRT 581	
Neuromuscular Physiology	
3
GSPRT 582	
Advanced Clinical Exercise Physiology	
3
GSPRT 601 	 Thesis II or GSPRT 603 Internship II	
3
PART-TIME ENROLLMENT
SUMMER YEAR 1 – 6 credits	
GSPRT 520 	 Advanced Laboratory Techniques	
3
GSPRT 510 	 Advanced Strength and Conditioning	
3 
FALL YEAR 1 – 6 credits	
GSPRT 540 	 Psychological Foundations of Performance	
3
GSPRT 550 	 Advanced Sport Nutrition	
3
SPRING YEAR 1 – 6 credits	
GSPRT 573	
Exercise Pharmacology	
3
GSPRT 582	
Advanced Clinical Exercise Physiology	
3
SUMMER YEAR 2 – 6 credits	
GSPRT 522	
Exercise Testing and Prescription  
in Clinical Populations	
3 
GSPRT 530 	 Research Methods and Statistics in  
Human Performance	
3
	
	
FALL YEAR 2 – 6 credits	
GSPRT 562	
Cardiopulmonary Physiology	
3
GSPRT 600 	 Thesis I or GSPRT 602 Internship I	
3
SPRING YEAR 2 – 6 credits	
GSPRT 581	
Neuromuscular Physiology	
3
GSPRT 601 	 Thesis II or GSPRT 603 Internship II	
3
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GSPRT 510 Advanced Strength and Conditioning
3 credits
The objective of this course is to provide majors with theoretical 
and practical knowledge of the physiological, biomechanical, 
administrative aspects of designing and supervising strength and 
conditioning programs for various population.
GSPRT 520 Advanced Laboratory Techniques
3 credits
This course is designed to give the student working knowledge 
of the procedures of various testing techniques used in both the 
laboratory as well as in field settings. The student will be expected 
to demonstrate expertise in various laboratory testing techniques 
as a requisite for course completion.
GSPRT 522 Exercise Testing and Prescription  
in Clinical Populations
3 credits
This course will provide students who are interested in working 
within a Clinical Exercise Physiology setting with the necessary 
skills to test and prescribe exercise for diseased populations. Skills 
learned will include ECG testing and interpretation, spirometry, as 
well as strength and aerobic fitness assessments. This course will 
also prepare students with the information needed to sit for the 
ACSM Clinical Exercise Physiology Certification exam.
GSPRT 530 Research Methods and Statistics  
in Human Performance
3 credits
This course is designed to introduce the student to methodological 
and statistical techniques specific to human performance and 
related fields. Students will be exposed to the research process 
and also various statistical techniques used to assess the efficacy 
of exercise interventions and conditioning programs. Student will 
also become familiar with various types of research and the benefits 
and drawbacks of each.
GSPRT 540 Psychological Foundations of Performance
3 credits
The purpose of this course is to help the student gain a greater 
understanding of psychological and emotional factors that influence 
athletic and nonathletic performance. Furthermore, the student will 
learn psychological theories and mechanisms for how psychological 
skills training can positively influence performance.
30
GSPRT 550 Advanced Sport Nutrition
3 credits
This course is designed to further develop an understanding of 
the influence of nutrition for acute and chronic biological and 
physiological adaptations to physical activity and sport. Emphasis 
will be placed on adaptations in macronutrients and micronutrients 
metabolism to fuel energy systems, popular performance enhancing 
and weight loss supplements, and current research trends that 
address various sports and populations.
 
GSPRT 562 Cardiopulmonary Physiology
3 credits
This course is a study of the physical principles as they apply to 
cardio-pulmonary physiology, anatomy of the lungs and heart, 
the mechanics of ventilation and pulmonary circulation, airway 
resistance, hemodynamics, lung compliance, and the non-uniform 
distribution of ventilation and perfusion. Gas laws and prediction 
equations to explain physiological changes will be studied and 
applied to the cardiopulmonary system. Oxygen transport and 
carbon dioxide transport are also covered in detail. Additional 
topics include laboratory studies, electrocardiographs, pulmonary 
function studies, invasive and non-invasive blood gas monitoring, 
and sleep studies.
GSPRT 573 Exercise Pharmacology
3 credits
This course will introduce students to the general principles 
of pharmacology and the common medications that they may 
encounter while working in a clinical exercise setting. Emphasis will 
be on general classifications of drugs, their mechanisms of action, 
the effect drug action on exercise and disease response. Attention 
will also be given to drugs used for therapeutic medication, for 
recreational purposes and for performance enhancement in sport. 
GSPRT 581 Neuromuscular Physiology
3 credits
The purpose of this course is to introduce graduate students to the 
study of neuromuscular physiology from an applied perspective. 
For this course, key topics in both cellular and systems physiology 
related to muscle and nerve function are presented, in addition to 
basic neuromuscular methodology in the laboratory. These concepts 
are then related to mechanisms of adaptation and exercise, force 
control, and control of functional movements in healthy adults, in 
addition to aging and disease.
GSPRT 582 Advanced Clinical Exercise Physiology
3 credits
This course is designed to provide students with an understanding 
of the current knowledge and trends in rehabilitation of 
populations with cardiac, pulmonary and metabolic disorders 
through assessment and specific exercise programming. This 
will further include a thorough explanation of the pathogenesis 
of these disorders. The course will also expose the student to 
the interpretation of electrocardiograms both at rest and during 
submaximal and maximal exercise bouts.
GSPRT 600 Master’s Thesis I
3 credits
For this course, the student will complete the first four chapters of 
his or her master’s thesis. The chapters include the introduction, 
literature review, statement of the problem and hypothesis, and 
proposed methods. This course will be completed prior to data 
collection on his or her master’s thesis and prior to GSPRT 601.
GSPRT 601 Master’s Thesis II
3 credits
For this course, the student will complete the final two chapters 
of his or her master’s thesis. The chapters include the results and 
discussion sections. This course prepares the student for the final 
thesis defense prior to obtaining the master’s degree.
GSPRT 602 Master’s Internship I
3 credits
For this course, the student will engage in a practical internship 
as assigned by the director or instructor of the Sport and Exercise 
Science Master’s program. The majority of these assignments will 
be in a clinical setting, a corporate fitness or community fitness 
facility, or with one of the athletic teams at the university. This 
internship will last the duration of the fall semester and require 
150 hours of internship hours.
GSPRT 603 Master’s Internship II
3 credits
This course is a continuation of GSPRT 602: Master’s Internship 
I. For this course, the student will engage in a practical internship 
as assigned by the director or instructor of the Sport and Exercise 
Science Master’s program. The majority of these assignments will 
be in a clinical setting, a corporate fitness or community fitness 
facility, or with one of the athletic teams at the university. This 
internship will last the duration of the spring semester and require 
150 hours of internship hours.
31
Master of Athletic Training
Master of  
Athletic Training
Program Director: Becky Mokris, D.Ed., LAT, ATC
INTRODUCTION
The Gannon University Master of Athletic Training (MAT) program 
is designed to prepare students to become certified Athletic Trainers 
through the Board of Certification (BOC). The Master of Athletic 
Training Program is designed around a comprehensive curriculum 
that has been created to integrate formal classroom instruction, 
online coursework and hands on, clinical education experiences.
Athletic Trainers (ATs) are health care professionals who 
collaborate with other healthcare providers, under the direction of a 
physician, to provide preventative services, emergency care, clinical 
diagnosis, therapeutic intervention and rehabilitation of injuries and 
medical conditions. Athletic trainers provide medical services to all 
types of patients, not just athletes participating in sports. Athletic 
Trainers practice in professional, collegiate, high school, military, 
performing arts physician offices, industrial settings and a variety 
of other healthcare settings.
VISION 
The Master of Athletic Training Program will be recognized 
within the community as a leader in preparing students to become 
exceptional athletic trainers, embracing social responsibility, and 
contributing to the profession’s body of knowledge.
MISSION
The Gannon University Athletic Training Program is dedicated 
to the professional preparation of knowledgeable, confident, 
skilled, compassionate, and reflective entry-level athletic trainers. 
Through comprehensive didactic, clinical education, and student-
faculty interactions, the MAT program will provide a foundation 
to promote critical thinking; foster foundational behaviors, develop 
interprofessional collaboration, life-long learning, and ethical 
practice in a rapidly changing healthcare environment. The program 
is built upon fostering social responsibility within the athletic 
training community and serving as an advocate to meet the future 
needs of health and wellness of the patients and society.
PHILOSOPHY 
The philosophy of the MAT program is to create and foster an 
environment that supports the ethical, legal, and professional 
responsibilities of an athletic trainer to carry on throughout the 
profession.
•	 Open-mindedness to an evolving profession that can meet the 
needs of the community. Encourages students to become propo-
nents of the profession and educate all clientele and employers 
of the growing demand for these services.
•	 Continue to be a healthcare advocate, work collaboratively, 
and put the needs of others as a priority to provide excellent 
healthcare.
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES
Outcomes have been designed in conjunction with the Standards for 
accreditation set forth by the national accrediting body that oversees 
athletic training programs, the Commission on the Accreditation 
of Athletic Training Education.
PROGRAM GOALS
The Master of Athletic Training Program will:
1.	 Promote and support excellence in academic and clinical 
teaching and learning.
2.	 Prepare students to become certified athletic trainers who will 
be recognized as excellent entry-level professionals.
3.	 Provide support and promote the field of athletic training in the 
community.
4.	 Promote, support and participate in interprofessional education 
and collaborative practice.
PROGRAM OUTCOMES AND 
LEARNING OBJECTIVES:
1.	 Program graduates will possess the necessary skills in cognitive, 
behavioral (psychosocial) and clinical skills for successful 
practice as a health care practitioner. 
	
•		 Learning Objective 1.1: Students will be able to demonstrate 
proficiency in clinical decision-making, evaluation 
techniques, injury and illness prevention and therapeutic 
interventions.
	
•		 Learning Objective 1.2: Students will be proficient in 
psychosocial techniques and promotion of health and 
wellness in a healthcare and community setting.
	
•		 Learning Objective 1.3: Students will demonstrate proficiency 
in verbal and written communication as a competent health 
care provider. 
2.	 Develop health care practitioners that practice evidence-based 
medicine and life-long learning skills in the health professions.
	
•		 Learning Objective 2.1: Students will demonstrate the use 
of research to make informed clinical decision making. 
	
•		 Learning Objective 2.2: Students will demonstrate proficiency 
in developing, researching, and analyzing focused clinical 
questions for development of original scholarship. 
	
•		 Learning Objective 2.3: Students will demonstrate 
understanding of continuing professional development 
throughout the lifespan of a career. 
3.	 Students will engage in activities that promote a transition to 
practice with other health professions across a variety of patient 
populations and various employment opportunities.
	
•		 Learning Objective 3.1: Clinical education will prepare 
students with learning experiences that prepare students to 
practice in a professional setting.
32
	
•		 Learning Objective 3.2: Students will demonstrate the 
ability to communicate with preceptors, parents, peers, and 
collaboration with other health care providers. 
	
•		 Learning Objective 3.3: Students will develop competence 
in practicing with a diverse patient population. 
4.	 Students will be able to demonstrate the ability to work within 
an interdisciplinary health care field promoting leadership, 
teamwork, ethical behavior and the administrative functions of 
a healthcare provider. 
	
•		 Learning Objective 4.1: After completion of the program 
students examine various administrative models to 
incorporate into clinical practice. 
	
•		 Learning Objective 4.2: After completion of the program 
students will demonstrate ethical responsibility as it relates 
to ethical practices and professionalism within national, state 
and institutional policies.
	
•		 Learning Objective 4.3: Upon completion of the program, 
students will be able to describe the values associated with 
leadership, service, respect, compassion and empathy in a 
clinical and community environment.
ACCREDITATION
The Gannon Master of Athletic Training program is accredited 
through the Commission on Accreditation of Athletic Training 
Education (CAATE). Only graduates of programs accredited 
through CAATE are eligible to sit for the Board of Certification 
(BOC) examination for athletic trainers.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
ENTRY-LEVEL MASTER OF ATHLETIC TRAINING 
(POST BACCALAUREATE)
Students who have, or will have, completed an undergraduate 
degree will be considered for admission if they meet the following 
minimum qualifications:
•	 Baccalaureate degree from an accredited college or university
•	 Prerequisite course at a C or better. Grades below a C are not 
acceptable.
	
–		 One semester Biology (100 level course)
	
–		 One semester Psychology (100 level course)
	
–		 One semester of Physics (100 level course with or without 
lab is acceptable)
	
–		 Anatomy and Physiology I and II
	
–		 2 semesters of 3-4 credits of anatomy with physiology – lab 
required (may have a 3 credit course if syllabus identifies a 
lab component) OR 1 semester of anatomy and 1 semester 
of physiology
	
–		 Statistics
	
–		 * may be 3 credit with lab component embedded in course• 
The student is permitted to retake prerequisite courses but 
must recognize that, given the accelerated nature of the 
program, deviating from the designed progression is not 
recommended if the student is to stay on pace for successful 
matriculation through to the professional portion of the 
program.
	
–		 Student must achieve a minimum of a C- or better in: 
	
	 	 •		 One semester of Chemistry with lab
•	 Overall undergraduate GPA of 2.75 or better (4.0 scale)
•	 Applicant demonstrates the ethical, personal, and professional 
qualities to fulfill the roll of the athletic trainer as determined 
by review of the applicant’s references
•	 Meets Technical Standards of the athletic trainer
•	 Successfully pass background checks as required
•	 International Students: ILETS score of 6.5 or higher, or a TOEFL 
score of 69 or higher
3+2 ACCELERATED PATHWAY  
5 YEAR MASTER OF ATHLETIC TRAINING
High school students will be eligible for the five-year accelerated 
pathway for the Master of Athletic Training program. 
The program offers accelerated pathways through the Applied 
Exercise Science Department or through a Health Science degree. 
Specific criteria for each of the accelerated pathways are located 
in the undergraduate catalog. 
•	 *exceptions may be made on a case by case basis 
ADMISSIONS PROCESS
Candidates for the entry-level master’s program will be considered 
for enrollment on a rolling basis. Students will be accepted for a 
summer semester entry only. Gannon University and the Master of 
Athletic Training program receives and reviews applications for the 
professional Master of Athletic Training program. Gannon internal 
candidates may apply through the Gannon University graduate ad-
missions application process. Students entering the Master of Athletic 
Training program through any articulation agreements will be consid-
ered internal candidates. All external candidates (non-GU students) 
must apply through the Athletic Training College Application Service 
(ATCAS), provided by the Commission on Accreditation of Athletic 
Training Education (CAATE). Full application instructions can be 
found on the Gannon University, Master of Athletic Training page 
by visiting https://atcas.liaisoncas.com.
Students will be notified of admissions decisions after review from 
the Office of Graduate Admissions and the Master of Athletic 
Training Program admissions committee. Students will be required 
to submit official transcripts and verification of degree completion 
prior to starting course work. Students must attest they are able to 
meet the technical standards of the program prior to full admission. 
Additionally, students must complete a criminal background 
check, a completed physical examination, immunization records 
and proof of health insurance as part of the final application 
process. International students must submit a criminal background 
check from their country of citizenship in addition to any other 
criminal background checks required by the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania. Out of state students must complete a criminal 
background check in their state of residency in addition to any 
other criminal background checks required by the Commonwealth 
of Pennsylvania.
33
Master of Athletic Training
The Master of Athletic Training Program has specified admissions 
guidelines for both five-year and post baccalaureate students that 
are outlined on the Master of Athletic Training website. See the 
program’s website for complete application process details. The 
website with this information is http://www.gannon.edu/Academic-
Offerings/Health-Professions-and-Sciences/Graduate/Athletic-
Training/Admissions-Information/
3 + 2 MAT PROGRAM
For those students enrolled in the accelerated 3 + 2 MAT program 
they must successfully complete the first-year graduate courses 
for completion of the intended undergraduate degree. Failure 
to successfully complete the graduate coursework may result in 
additional undergraduate coursework to fulfill the undergraduate 
degree requirements.
TECHNICAL STANDARDS OF THE 
ATHLETIC TRAINING STUDENT
The Gannon University Athletic Training Program (MAT) is a 
rigorous and intense program that places specific requirements and 
demands on the students enrolled in the program. An objective of 
this program is to prepare graduates to enter a variety of employment 
settings and to render care to a wide spectrum of individuals 
engaged in physical activity. The technical standards set forth 
by the MAT program establish the essential qualities considered 
necessary for students admitted to this program to achieve the 
competencies of an entry-level athletic trainer, as well as meet 
the expectations of the Commission on Accreditation of Athletic 
Training Education. The following abilities and expectations must 
be met by all students admitted to the MAT program. In the event a 
student is unable to fulfill these technical standards, with or without 
reasonable accommodation, the student will not be admitted into the 
program. Compliance with the program’s technical standards does 
not guarantee a student’s eligibility for the BOC exam. Candidates 
for selection to the Athletic Training Program must demonstrate:
1.	 The mental capacity to assimilate, analyze, synthesize, integrate 
concepts and problem solve to formulate assessment and 
therapeutic judgments and to be able to distinguish deviations 
from the norm.
2.	 Sufficient postural and neuromuscular control, sensory function, 
and coordination to perform appropriate physical examinations 
using accepted techniques; and accurately, safely and efficiently 
use equipment and materials during the assessment and treatment 
of patients.
3.	 The ability to communicate effectively and sensitively with 
patients and colleagues, including individuals from different 
cultural and social backgrounds; this includes, but is not limited 
to, the ability to establish rapport with patients and communicate 
judgments and treatment information effectively. Students must 
be able to understand and speak the English language at a level 
consistent with competent professional practice.
4.	 The ability to record the physical examination results and a 
treatment plan clearly and accurately.
5.	 The capacity to maintain composure and continue to function 
well during periods of high stress.
6.	 The perseverance, diligence and commitment to complete the 
ATP curriculum as outlined and sequenced.
7.	 Flexibility and the ability to adjust to changing situations and 
uncertainty in clinical situations.
8.	 Affective skills and appropriate demeanor and rapport that relate 
to professional education and quality patient care.
Candidates for selection to the Gannon University MAT program 
will be required to verify they understand and meet these technical 
standards or that they believe that, with certain accommodations, 
they can meet the standards. In compliance with the Americans 
with Disabilities Act, the admissions process does not require 
disclosure of a disability. However, all enrolled students must be 
capable of meeting the technical standards for the academic and 
clinical education components of the Athletic Training program.
These technical standards are necessary for full participation 
in the curriculum and it is expected that students will function 
independently, which generally means, without the aid of an 
intermediary, to achieve proficiency in all curricular areas. 
Applicants and students should review the technical standards 
for the AT Program carefully. A student who has a disability may 
request reasonable accommodations.
ACADEMIC PROGRESSION
Students enrolled in the five-year master’s degree program will be 
required to meet the following criteria to retain their guaranteed 
admission to the professional phase of the education (years four and 
five). Failure to do so may interrupt the planned course of study. 
•	 Maintain a cumulative GPA of 3.0 evaluated after sophomore 
year, spring semester. Failure to do so will lead to probationary 
status in which the student will be granted one year to show 
progress toward raising their GPA to the acceptable standard. 
At the end of the yearlong probationary period, the student 
must possess (by fall of their junior year) a cumulative and 
prerequisite GPA of 3.0 or higher or they will be removed 
from the five-year master’s program and will be placed in 
an alternative plan of study. The student may then apply for 
admission to the entry-level master’s degree program at the 
conclusion of the undergraduate degree and will be considered 
according to the standards highlighted previously.
	
*	exceptions may be made on a case by case basis based on the 
discretion of the program director and a review of the overall 
academic progress with the Dean.
•	 Students must achieve a grade of “C” or better in all prerequisite 
courses.
	
–		 One semester Biology (100 level course)
	
–		 One semester social/behavioral science (200 level course) 
(Gannon students take PSYCH 222)
	
–		 One semester of Physics (100 level course with or without 
lab is acceptable)
	
–		 Anatomy and Physiology I and II
34
	
–		 2 semesters of 3-4 credits of anatomy with physiology – lab 
required (may have a 3 credit course if syllabus identifies a 
lab component) OR 1 semester of anatomy and 1 semester 
of physiology
	
–		 Statistics
	
–		 The student is permitted to retake prerequisite courses but 
must recognize that, given the accelerated nature of the 
program, deviating from the designed progression is not 
recommended if the student is to stay on pace for successful 
matriculation through to the professional portion of the 
program.
•	 Students must achieve a C- or better in:
	
–		 One semester of Chemistry with lab
Students enrolled in the professional phase of the MAT program 
will be required to meet the following criteria in order to matriculate 
to graduation from the program.
•	 Maintain a cumulative GPA of 3.0; students who fall below these 
criteria will be granted one semester of probationary status in 
which they will be required to raise their grade point average 
above the minimum standard, or they will be separated from 
the program.
•	 Achieve a grade of “C” or better in all graduate level courses.
•	 Retake no more than two 500-level courses over the course of 
the program.
•	 Retaking a course will lead to deceleration in the program and 
will delay completion of the program
Entry-Level Post-Baccalaureate Option
The post baccalaureate, two year program, is designed for students 
who have already completed a bachelor’s degree in a related field 
or have met the admission requirements for graduate entry. The 
program consists of 60 credits of graduate level education and 
clinical experiences. The multi-year cycle is below.
Five-Year Bachelor’s to Master Option
The five-year master’s degree option is designed for incoming 
freshmen (or transfers who meet degree matriculation requirements) 
who are interested in an accelerated path toward the Master in 
Athletic Training (MAT) degree. In this option, students complete 
three years of undergraduate course work within the Athletic 
Training Health Science degree or Applied Exercise Science 
foundational and core courses as well as the Gannon University 
Liberal Studies Core followed by two years of the professional 
level MAT core courses creating the 3+2 accelerated path. Students 
will begin their “professional phase” beginning the summer after 
their junior year and will then have graduate student status. At 
the conclusion of the spring semester of the 4th year students will 
receive a Bachelor of Science degree in Applied Exercise Science. 
Following the completion of the 5th year, students will receive a 
Master of Athletic Training degree.
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
ENTRY-LEVEL MASTER OF ATHLETIC TRAINING  
(60 CREDITS TOTAL)
SUMMER YEAR 1 – 10 credits
GMAT 502	
Applied Kinesiology	
3
GMAT 503	
Foundations in Therapeutic Interventions	
2
GMAT 504	
Clinical Application of Care/Prevention in AT	
3
GMAT 506	
Principles of Athletic Training	
2
FALL YEAR 1 – 11 credits
GMAT 516	
Clinical Experience in AT I	
4
GMAT 517	
Evidence-Based Practice I	
1
GMAT 531	
Evaluation and Treatment  
of the Lower Extremity	
4
GMAT 542	
Clinical Medicine I	
2
SPRING YEAR 1 – 11 credits
GMAT 529	
Evidence Based Practice II	
1
GMAT 538	
Evaluation and Treatment
	
	 	 	
of the Upper Extremity	
4
GMAT 546	
Clinical Experience in AT II	
4
GMAT 611	
Clinical Medicine II	
2
SUMMER YEAR 2 – 7 credits
GMAT 554	
Health and Fitness Principles	
2
GMAT 612	
Clinical Experience in AT III	
2
GMAT 655	
Organization and Administration	
3
FALL YEAR 2 – 12 credits
GMAT 556	
Practical Applications of Health and Wellness	
2
GMAT 633	
Evidence-Based Practice III	
1
GMAT 577	
Eval and Treatment of the Head,  
Neck and Spine	
3
GMAT 631	
Clinical Experience in AT IV	
4
GMAT 685	
Behavioral and Psychological  
Conditions in AT	
2
SPRING YEAR 2 – 9 credits
GMAT 688	
Athletic Training Capstone	
1
GMAT 670	
Clinical Experience in AT V	
8
35
Master of Athletic Training
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
FIVE-YEAR MASTER OF ATHLETIC TRAINING 
B.S. Applied Exercise Science to MAT Option
(160-161 CREDITS TOTAL)
FRESHMAN FALL – 15 credits 
ENGL 101	
Foundational English	
3
THEO 101	
Foundational Theology	
3
PHIL 101	
Foundational Philosophy	
3
BIOL 104	
Human Biology	
3
MATH 112	
Trigonometry	
3
CRS #	
Gannon 101	
0
FRESHMAN SPRING – 18 credits 
CRS #	
Integrative History	
3
SPRT 130	
Sport Nutrition	
3
CRS #	
Integrative English	
3
CRS #	
Integrative Theology	
3
PSYC 111	
Introduction to Psychology	
3
PHYS 101	
Concepts in Physics 	
3
SOPHOMORE FALL – 17 credits
BIOL 
115/116	
Human and Physiology I/Lab	
4
CHEM 
111/112	
General Chemistry I with Lab	
4
CRS #	
Integrative Philosophy	
3
CRS #	
Aesthetic Reasoning	
3
PSYCH 222	 Psychology of Human Development	
3
SOPHOMORE SPRING – 17 credits
BIOL 
117/118	
Human and Physiology II/Lab	
4
SPRT 250	
Exercise Psychology	
3
SPRT 
360/361	
Kinesiology with Lab	
4
PSYC 211	
Statistics**	
3
	
	 	 	
Integrative Communication	
3
JUNIOR FALL – 17 credits
SPRT 310	
Research Methods	
3
	
	 	 	
Global Citizenship	
3
	
	 	 	
Professional Ethics and Leadership	
3
SPRT 
390/391	
Exercise Physiology with Lab	
4
SPRT 
400/401	
Exercise Testing and Prescription	
4
JUNIOR SPRING – 16 credits
SPRT 415	
Motor Learning and Performance 	
3
SPRT 416	
Motor Control	
3
SPRT 420	
Prevention and Care of Athletic Injuries	
4
SPRT 425	
Clinical Exercise Physiology	
3
	
	 	 	
Professional Communication	
3
SENIOR SUMMER – MAT PROGRAM STARTS	10
SENIOR FALL	 10
SENIOR SPRING	 4
SUMMER YEAR 1 – 10 credits
GMAT 506	
Principles of Athletic Training	
2
GMAT 504	
Clinical Application of Care/ 
Prevention in AT	
3
GMAT 502	
Applied Kinesiology	
3
GMAT 503	
Foundations in Therapeutic Interventions	
2
FALL YEAR 1 – 11 credits
GMAT 531	
Evaluation and Treatment
	
	 	 	
of the Lower Extremity	
4
GMAT 542	
Clinical Medicine I	
2
GMAT 517	
Evidence-Based Practice I	
1
GMAT 516	
Clinical Experience in AT I	
4
SPRING YEAR 1 – 11 credits
GMAT 538	
Evaluation and Treatment	
	
	 	 	
of the Upper Extremity	
4
GMAT 611	
Clinical Medicine II	
2
GMAT 529	
Evidence Based Practice II	
1
GMAT 546	
Clinical Experience in AT II	
4
SUMMER YEAR 2 – 9 credits
GMAT 554	
Health and Fitness Principles	
2
GMAT 685	
Behavioral and Psychological  
Conditions in AT	
2 
GMAT 655	
Organization and Administration	
3
GMAT 612	
Clinical Experience in AT III	
2
FALL YEAR 2 – 10 credits
GMAT 633	
Evidence-Based Practice III	
1
GMAT 577	
Eval and Treatment of the Head, 
Neck and Spine	
3
GMAT 631	
Clinical Experience in AT IV	
4
GMAT 556	
Practical Applications of Health and Wellness	
2
SPRING YEAR 2 – 9 credits
GMAT 688	
Athletic Training Capstone	
1
GMAT 670	
Clinical Experience in AT V	
8
36
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
B.S. Health Science to MAT option
(158-159 CREDITS TOTAL)
FRESHMAN FALL – 18 credits 
CRS #	
Gannon 101	
0
PSYC 111	
Introduction to Psychology	
3
	
	 	 	
Foundational English	
3
	
	 	 	
Foundational Philosophy	
3
	
	 	 	
Foundational Theology	
3
PHAS 121	
Medical Terminology	
3
MATH 112	
Trigonometry	
3
FRESHMAN SPRING – 17 credits 
	
	 	 	
Integrative English	
3
	
	 	 	
Integrative Philosophy	
3
SOCI 110	
Basic Sociology	
3
AT 100	
Introduction to Athletic Training	
2
PHYS 101	
Concepts in Physics	
3
BIOL 104	
Human Biology	
3
SOPHOMORE FALL – 17 credits
BIOL 115	
Human Anatomy and Physiology I	
3
BIOL 116	
Human Anatomy and Physiology I Lab	
1
	
	 	 	
Integrative History	
3
	
	 	 	
Health Science Elective	
3
CHEM 111	
General Chemistry I	
3
CHEM 112	
General Chemistry I Lab	
1
	
	 	 	
Integrative Theology	
3
SOPHOMORE SPRING – 16–17 credits
SPRT 130	
Sports Nutrition	
3
BIOL 117	
Human Anatomy and Physiology II	
3
BIOL 118	
Human Anatomy and Physiology II Lab	
1
PSYC 211	
Psychological Statistics	
3
	
	 	 	
Health Science Elective	
3-4
	
	 	 	
Global Citizenship	
3
JUNIOR FALL – 17-18 credits
SPRT 390	
Physiology of Exercise and Sprt	
3
SPRT 391	
Physiology of Exercise and Sprt Lab	
1
	
	 	 	
Health Science Elective	
3-4
	
	 	 	
Health Science Elective	
3-4
	
	 	 	
Integrative Communication	
3
	
	 	 	
Health Science Elective	
3
JUNIOR SPRING – 16 credits
	
	 	 	
Health Science Elective	
3
	
	 	 	
Health Science Elective	
4
	
	 	 	
Aesthetic Reasoning	
3
	
	 	 	
Professional Ethics/Leadership	
3
	
	 	 	
Professional Communication	
3
SENIOR SUMMER – HEALTH SCIENCE ELECTIVES	 10
GMAT 502	
Applied Kinesiology	
3
GMAT 503	
Therapeutic Intervention	
2
GMAT 504	
Clinical Care and Prev in AT	
3
GMAT 506	
Principles of AT	
2
SENIOR FALL – HEALTH SCIENCE ELECTIVES	
8
GMAT 531	
Eval and Treat of Lower Extrem	
4
GMAT 516	
Clinical Experience in AT I	
4
SENIOR SPRING – HEALTH SCIENCE ELECTIVES	
4
GMAT 538	
Eval and Treat of Upper Extrem	
4
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Students must be enrolled in the MAT program to enroll in these 
courses.
GMAT 502 Applied Kinesiology 
3 cr. lecture/lab
The purpose of this course is to explore human movement during 
performance of activities, especially the geometry of movement 
(kinematics) and the forces influencing movement (kinetics). This 
course will focus on applying an understanding of human movement 
and pathomechanics in a manner that is foundational for future 
studies in rehabilitation.
GMAT 503 Foundation in Therapeutic Interventions 
2 cr. lecture
This introductory course provides student with knowledge of 
theory and physiological concepts related to physical rehabilitation 
and therapeutic modalities. This course will relay foundational 
knowledge needed for clinical application.
GMAT 504 Clinical Application of Care/Prevention in AT 
3 cr. lab
This course will develop the essential skill application needed for 
the prevention, assessment, and treatment of acute and emergent 
illnesses and injuries within the profession of athletic training. 
Emergency procedures, therapeutic taping, bracing, splinting 
techniques, and referral decisions will also be evaluated in 
this course.
GMAT 506 Principles of Athletic Training 
2 cr. lecture
This course provides an introduction to the athletic training 
profession and an overview of the essential functions and duties 
of an athletic trainer as well as the sports medicine team. Students 
will gain basic skills required for general injury and illness 
prevention, legal considerations, environmental concerns, and 
general evaluation process. 
37
Master of Athletic Training
GMAT 516 Clinical Experience in Athletic Training I 
4 cr. clinical
Prerequisite GMAT 504 and GMAT 506
This supervised clinical educational experience develops hands-
on application of athletic training skills with program approved 
health care providers. Students will be able to develop professional 
behaviors and interactions within a health care team.
GMAT 517 Evidence-Based Practice I 
1 cr. lecture
This course is designed to discuss the role of research in the 
health professions. Content will discuss research terminology, 
epidemiology, database searches, developing research questions 
and the use of disablement models.
GMAT 529 Evidence-Based Practice II
1 cr. lecture
Prerequisite GMAT 517
This course will introduce the students on the research process 
which includes research hypotheses, research design, methods, 
statistical techniques and the ethical issues regarding human 
subjects.
GMAT 531 Evaluation and Treatment  
of the Lower Extremity 
4 cr. lecture/lab
Prerequisite GMAT 502
This course addresses evaluation and assessment techniques of 
musculoskeletal injuries to the lower extremity. Through didactic 
and hands-on learning the student will integrate knowledge of 
anatomical structures, physiological principles, and evaluative 
techniques to provide a basis for critical decision-making in an 
injury management environment. Decision-making will be based on 
recognition, evaluation, and immediate care of orthopedic injuries 
caused by physical activity or exercise. This course will further 
discuss appropriate therapeutic intervention techniques used to 
treat pathological conditions related to lower extremity function.
GMAT 538 Evaluation and Treatment  
of the Upper Extremity 
4 cr. Lecture/lab
Prerequisite GMAT 531
This course addresses evaluation and assessment techniques of 
musculoskeletal injuries to the upper extremity. Through didactic 
and hands-on learning the student will integrate knowledge of 
anatomical structures, physiological principles, and evaluative 
techniques to provide a basis for critical decision-making in an 
injury management environment. Students will review clinical 
reasoning skills based on recognition, evaluation, and immediate 
care of orthopedic injuries in the upper extremity. This course will 
further discuss appropriate therapeutic intervention techniques used 
to treat pathological conditions related to upper extremity function.
GMAT 542 Clinical Medicine I 
2 cr. Lecture
This course is an introduction to medical conditions for the athletic 
trainer/health care provider, diagnostic imaging testing, and basic 
principles of pharmacology. The course will review common 
procedures used in the athletic training facility. This course will also 
discuss special considerations for athletes such as drug misuse and 
performance enhancing drugs used by athletes and ethical issues 
surrounding the use of pharmacology in sport.
GMAT 546 Clinical Experience in Athletic Training II
4 cr. Clinical
Prerequisite GMAT 516
This supervised, semester long, clinical educational experience 
develops hands-on application of athletic training skills with 
program-approved health care providers. Students will be able to 
develop professional behaviors and interactions within a health 
care team.
GMAT 554 Health and Fitness Principles 
2 cr. Lecture
Course will examine the principles of nutrition and wellness as 
specifically related to sports participants. Students will acquire 
the knowledge necessary to apply sound nutritional, strength and 
conditioning, and wellness practices in the athletic population. This 
course also focuses on the design and application of programs for 
diet planning, aerobic and anaerobic training.
GMAT 556 Practical Applications of Health and Wellness 
2 cr. Lab
Prerequisite GMAT 554
Course will examine the principles of nutrition and wellness as 
specifically related to sports participants. This course is designed 
to instruct students in the safety and proper mechanics of wellness 
and weight training. Students will acquire knowledge as to the 
developments of specific resistance training programs through 
activity, laboratory and technology experiences. This course also 
focuses on the design and application of programs for diet planning, 
aerobic and anaerobic training.
GMAT 577 Evaluation and Treatment of the Head,  
Neck and Spine 
3 cr. Lecture/lab
Prerequisite GMAT 538
This course addresses evaluation and assessment techniques of 
musculoskeletal injuries to the head, neck and spine. Through 
a hands-on approach the student will integrate knowledge of 
anatomical structures, physiological principles, and evaluative 
techniques to provide a basis for critical decision-making in an 
injury management environment. Decision-making will be based on 
recognition, evaluation, and immediate care of injuries to the head, 
neck and spine. Treatment intervention strategies will be addressed 
related to pathologies discussed within the course.
38
GMAT 611 Clinical Medicine II 
2 cr. Lecture
Prerequisite GMAT 542
The course is a continuation of Clinical Medicine I that continues 
to prepare athletic training students with normal and abnormal 
physiology of different body systems and the differential 
diagnoses of various medical conditions. The course will discuss 
the pharmacological agents used in the treatment of the medical 
conditions.
GMAT 612 Clinical Experience in Athletic Training III 
2 cr. Clinical
Prerequisite GMAT 545
This course is designed to provide students with opportunities to 
develop clinical proficiency in evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment 
on non-orthopedic conditions developed through the lifespan.
GMAT 631 Clinical Experience in Athletic Training IV 
4 cr. Clinical
Prerequisite GMAT 612
This supervised clinical educational experience develops hands-
on application of athletic training skills with program approved 
health care providers. Students will be able to develop professional 
behaviors and interactions within a health care team and work 
toward autonomous practice readiness.
GMAT 633 Evidence-Based Practice III 
1 cr. Lecture
Prerequisite GMAT 517 and GMAT 529
This course will educate students regarding development of 
discussion points and finalize scholarly research. Students will 
also prepare scholarly work with the intent of utilizing a public 
forum for dissemination.
GMAT 655 Organization and Administration  
in Athletic Training 
3 cr. Lecture
Discussion of the issues in the organization and administration 
of athletic training programs to facilities. Topics will cover 
the knowledge to develop, administer, and manage a facility. 
Legal responsibility, protection of individuals, and implications 
of misconduct will be addressed. In addition, professional 
responsibilities and avenues of professional development will be 
addressed.
GMAT 670 Clinical Experience in Athletic Training V
8 cr. Clinical
Prerequisite GMAT 631
This full-time clinical experience is designed for immersion 
into supervised athletic training practice. Working closely with 
preceptors, students will gain continued experience in all aspects 
of athletic training with an emphasis on inter-professional practice. 
Working closely with preceptors, students will gain continued 
experience in all aspects of athletic training, placing emphasis 
on transition to practice and development of leadership and 
organizational skills.
GMAT 685 Behavioral and Psychological  
Considerations in AT 
2 cr. Lecture
Students in the course will gain a comprehensive understanding of 
the psychosocial impact of injury and the rehabilitation process. 
Topics include, but are not limited to, psychosocial antecedents to 
injury, the emotional impact of injury, and the role that the athletic 
trainer plays in the rehabilitation process, not only physically, but 
psychosocially.
GMAT 688 Capstone in Athletic Training 
1 cr. Lecture
This course is designed to discuss contemporary issues of transition 
to practice as an entry level professional and to prepare students 
for the Board of Certification Examination.
39
Biomedical Engineering
Biomedical 
Engineering
Director: Saeed Tiari Ph. D.
INTRODUCTION
Biomedical Engineering (BME) or Medical Engineering is applying 
engineering principles and design concepts to medicine and biology 
for healthcare purposes (e.g., diagnostic or therapeutic). This 
field seeks to close the gap between engineering and medicine, 
combining the design and problem-solving skills of engineering 
with medical, biological sciences to advance health care treatment, 
including diagnosis, monitoring, and therapy. Gannon University 
Graduate program focuses on Biomechanics, Bio-Mechatronics, 
and Biomaterials.
PROGRAM OBJECTIVES:
The Master’s Program is designed to produce graduates who:
1.	 Advanced knowledge and skills appropriate to Biomedical 
Engineering.
	
•		 Analyze data and apply critical thinking skills to identify 
bio-medical problems, manage risk, or propose data-driven 
recommendations or solutions.
2.	 Knowledge or application of ethical standards within Biomedical 
Engineering.
	
•		 demonstrate appropriate leadership skills while recognizing 
and assessing moral and ethical components and complexity 
of challenges faced by the medical and engineering 
community.
3.	 Professional communication and disseminated information 
appropriate for Biomedical Engineering.
	
•		 Display competence with oral, written, and graphical 
communications, appropriate for professional clinical and 
engineering environments.
4.	 Contributions, such as service, to the Biomedical Engineering 
profession and/or community.
DEGREES OFFERED
The program offers a Master of Science degree in biomedical 
engineering (MS-BME). 
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1.	 Applicants must have earned a bachelor’s degree in Biomedical 
Engineering from an ABET-accredited program or equivalent 
to a QPA of 2.5 or better.
2.	 Applicants with non-biomedical degrees may be admitted 
but may require additional course work as determined by the 
program director.
3.	 Applicants must submit the following: 
	
a.	 Completed application
	
b.	 Transcripts for all prior college coursework
	
c.	 Three recommendation letters
	
d.	 TOEFL scores if English is not the first language
CURRICULUM
Upon commencement of graduate studies in the Biomedical 
Engineering Program, the student can choose to study for a 
biomechanical or biomaterial track. The student will be assigned 
an initial academic advisor by the program director. The advisor 
and student will select appropriate courses for the objectives of 
the student and obtain approval of this course of study through the 
academic approval sequence. 
Course Requirements: 
Programming course: Either GECE 502 Embedded C Program-
ming, GME565 Computer Assisted Engineering or Equivalent 
graduate programming course.
Advanced Math course: Either GENG 603 Advanced Engi-
neering Analysis I or equivalent GECE 504
All students must complete at least one systems development 
course before graduation. 
Systems development courses: 
GCIS 514	
Requirements and Project Management
GECE 501 	
Engineering Project and Management
GENG 570 	
Introduction to Systems Engineering 
GENG 624 	
Project Management
Students are required to take 3 courses out of the chosen 
concentration.
MATERIALS Credit
GBME 562	
Surface Science and Engineering	
3
GBME 554	
Tribology	
3
GBME 571	
Continuum Biomechanics	
3
GBME 566	
Energy Storage Systems	
3
GBME 589	
Nanotechnology for E Bio-engineers	
3
GBME 583	
Polymer Bio-Engineering	
3
BIOMECHANICS AND PROSTHETICS	
GBME 580	
Haptics	
3
GBME 560	
Biosignal Processing	
3
GBME 579	
Biomedical Robotics and Biomimetics	
3
GBME 567	
Biofluid Mechanics	
3
GBME 565	
Biomedical Heat and Mass Transfer	
3
GME 630	
Computational Fluid Dynamics	
3
40
The remaining courses are electives and can be chosen among 
GBME, GENG, GME, GECE, GENV with the approval of the 
program director and if prerequisites are satisfied.
After the student has completed 12 graduate credits of study, 
the student will be assessed relative to their preparedness to 
begin thesis or project work. The candidate must have a 3.0 
QPA to continue for the degree. The candidate must then choose 
one of the three projects/ thesis plans below for completion of their 
degree, and an advisor will be assigned to guide the candidate for 
the completion of the degree work. Students cannot register for 
project/thesis credits until after 12 credits of graduate work are 
completed (see plans A, B, and C below). The degrees require a total 
of 30 credit hours of graduate work. Up to 6 credits of approved 
graduate work can be transferred from another graduate program. 
Plan A (Thesis): 
The candidate will be required to submit a 6-credit thesis as part 
of the 30 credits of graduate course work and pass a final oral 
examination on the thesis material and related subjects. The thesis 
work must be approved by the faculty and program director before 
the commencement of the research work. The thesis advisor will 
direct the student’s work and determine when to recommend 
the manuscript for review by a faculty committee. The review 
committee will be appointed by the program director and shall 
consist of at least three full-time Gannon engineering faculty 
members familiar with the subject material and one member 
outside the BISE department. The outside member can be from 
the industry. The faculty advisor will be the chair of the review 
committee. The credit for the thesis will be counted in lieu of 6 
technical elective credits.
Plan B (Project): 
The student will be required to complete a design project and 
to pass a final examination covering the student’s project and 
related subject areas. The project can be worth 3 or 6 credits as 
part of the 30 credits of graduate course work, depending on the 
difficulty of the project. The project must be approved by the 
faculty and program director prior to the commencement of the 
project work. The project advisor will direct the student’s work 
and determine when to recommend the manuscript for review by 
a faculty committee. The review committee will be appointed by 
the faculty and program director and shall consist of at least three 
full-time Gannon engineering faculty members familiar with the 
subject material, and the faculty advisor will be the chair of the 
review committee. The credit for the project will be counted in 
lieu of technical elective credits.
Plan C (Project Course): 
The student will be required to complete a 3 credit course designated 
as a project course. The program director will approve the project 
course prior to the commencement of the project work and 
must include a significant project for its completion. The course 
instructor will inform the student of the complete requirements 
for the project course and will oversee the work to ensure that 
the student satisfies these requirements. Students are required to 
prepare a manuscript in thesis format for the project.
In order to earn the master’s degree in Biomedical Engineering, 
students must complete all required coursework outlined within 
the curriculum matrix with no grade below a C. Students must also 
maintain a cumulative GPA equal to or greater than 3.0 and fulfill 
all graduate study and specific degree completion requirements as 
outlined in the Gannon University Graduate Catalog. 
Since this is a graduate program with no immediate intentions 
of delivering curriculum online, there is no impact on liberal 
studies outcomes or distance education. The alignment of program 
outcomes with graduate outcomes is provided below.
FIVE-YEAR BACHELOR OF SCIENCE 
BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING 
(BME)/ MASTER OF SCIENCE IN 
BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING (M.E.) 
DEGREE PROGRAM
The five-year BME Bachelor of Science/BME Master of Science 
degree is designed to allow outstanding undergraduate students the 
opportunity to earn both an undergraduate and a graduate degree. 
The programs may be completed in five years of full-time study 
(includes one summer). Students in their Junior first semester with 
a minimum 2.8 cumulative GPA can apply for this program. The 
students accepted into this program should plan to complete a set 
of Liberal Studies courses during the summer after their junior year. 
A set of first-year graduate courses will be taken during the senior 
year. No more than seven additional graduate credits are allowed 
prior to the completion of the B.S. degree.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GBME 562 Surface Science and Engineering
3 credits
This course provides an introduction to surface properties of 
materials and an overview of electron microscopy, surface analysis 
techniques, adhesion and adhesive bonding technology. The course 
emphasizes conceptual understanding as well as practical industrial-
related applications of the material. Topics covered include surface 
properties of materials, surface wettability and surface tension, 
surface modification treatments, microscopy and surface analysis 
techniques, adhesion, adhesive bonding and related industrial 
applications, bond failure investigations and failure analysis.
GBME 554 Tribology
3 credits 
This course addresses the design of tribological systems: the 
interfaces between two or more bodies in relative motion. 
Fundamental topics include: geometric, chemical, and physical 
characterization of surfaces; friction and wear mechanisms 
41
Biomedical Engineering
for metal, polymers, and ceramics, including abrasive wear, 
delamination theory, tool wear, erosive wear, wear of polymers and 
composites; and boundary lubrication and solid-film lubrication. 
The course also considers the relationship between nano-tribology 
and macro-tribology, rolling contracts, tribological problems in 
magnetic recording and electrical contracts, and monitoring and 
diagnosis of friction and wear. Case studies are used to illustrate 
key points. 
GBME 560 Biosignal Processing 
3 credits 
In this course, students will learn how to design and choose a 
filter for processing signals commonly collected in Biomedical 
Engineering (e.g., electromyography, electrocardiogram, forceplate 
data). Topics to be covered include FIR filters, IIR filters, 
Butterworth filters, and residual analysis. Signal processing will 
be performed using user-generated code to understand how these 
filters are practically implemented.
GBME 565 Biomedical Heat and Mass Transfer
3 credits 
This course is an introduction to biomedical heat and mass 
transfer. The relevant principles of heat transfer will be reviewed. 
Macroscopic and microscopic approaches to biomedical heat 
transfer will be covered. An introduction to mass transfer and its 
applications in biomedical and biological systems will be presented. 
GBME 566 Energy Storage Systems
3 credits
In this course, energy storage techniques such as thermal, 
electrochemical, mechanical, and electromagnetic, as well as 
energy storage in organic biofuels, will be covered. Different 
energy storage methods will be compared in terms of cost, size, 
weight, reliability, and lifetimes. The differences, advantages, 
disadvantages, and variety of applications of these techniques 
will be presented. Specific emphasis will be placed on biomedical 
systems such as rehabilitation systems, implantable and wearable 
devices.
GBME 567 Biofluid Mechanics
3 credits
The course introduces fundamental physical concepts and 
mathematical equations describing the dynamics of fluid flows 
and their application to biomedical problems. At the completion 
of the course, students should be familiar with the basic governing 
equations of fluid flows, understand several basic flows in different 
human organ systems, understand methods used to study flows in 
biomedical engineering. 
GBME 571 Continuum Biomechanics 
3 credits 
This course is concerned with the study of continuum mechanics 
applied to biological systems. This subject allows the description 
of when a bone may fracture due to excessive loading, how blood 
behaves as both a solid and a fluid, down to how cells respond to 
mechanical forces that lead to changes in their behavior. 
GBME 579 Biomedical Robotics and Biomimetics
3 credits 
Biomedical Robotics focuses on activities such as rehabilitation, 
training/simulation, manipulation, surgery. These areas currently 
depend on labor-intensive manual procedures performed by highly 
trained professionals. The goal of the course is to analyze how to 
improve and transform these operations through teleoperation and 
automation. Furthermore, several aspects of biomimetics will be 
discussed during the course. Biomimetics uses nature as an example 
to build robots that can swim like a fish, fly like a bird or insect, 
and walk on rough terrain as many quadrupeds. 
GBME 580 Haptics
3 credits 
In this course, students will learn about tactile sensors, how they 
are programmed, and real-world applications of these sensors. 
Topics to be covered include tactile sensors, piezoelectric sensors, 
and robotic surgery. 
GBME 583 Polymer Bio-Engineering
3 credits 
Prerequisite: Background in general chemistry and material science 
as undergraduate. 
This course is designed to introduce graduate engineering students 
to the important field of polymer science. The course will be 
focused on the fundamentals of polymer science. Since polymers 
are ubiquitous in modern society, a background in this subject is 
essential for engineers who wish to pursue careers in the industry.
GBME 589 Nanotechnology for Bio-Engineers 
3 credits
Prerequisite: Background in general chemistry and material science 
as undergraduate. 
This course is designed to introduce graduate engineering 
students to the important field of nanotechnology. The course 
will be focused on the fundamentals of nanomaterials (i.e., 
synthesis, characterization, properties, and applications). Since 
nanotechnology is a field with an incredible promise to change the 
future of society in almost every facet, a background in this subject 
is essential for engineers who wish to pursue careers in the industry.
GBME 680 Graduate Internship 
1-3 credits 
For this course, the student will engage in a practical internship as 
assigned by the director of the Biomedical Engineering Master’s 
program. The experience must provide significant responsibilities 
or learning opportunities in Biomedical Engineering. Each credit 
is considered as 50 hours of internship hours.
42
Business 
Administration 
(MBA) – Online
Director: Rick Stachel, D.Sc.
INTRODUCTION
Gannon University is a student-oriented teaching university. This 
philosophy guides our approach to curriculum design, teaching, 
and advising. We recognize and understand the dramatic changes 
ongoing in the world of business. Our approach is to pay careful 
attention to each student, challenge them to grow, and help them 
to reach their own personal and career objectives. Courses in the 
Master of Business Administration Program (MBA) are rigorous 
and challenging by design, but faculty are prepared to work with 
students to build the skills needed for the business world of the 
21st century.
Gannon University’s MBA program was founded in 1970 and our 
experience as the region’s first graduate program in business has 
taught us some important lessons. Simply having a master’s degree, 
regardless of the type of degree or apparent status of the degree-
granting institution, is no assurance of success or happiness. To 
succeed in business, individuals need real skills, an understanding 
of the complex business environment and an appreciation for the 
value of work itself. Our network of over 1,600 MBA alumni is a 
proud testament to Gannon’s ability to make success happen for 
its graduate students. Gannon MBA Alumni include Presidents/
CEO’s, Vice Presidents, CFO’s, Treasurers, and Managing Partners. 
In addition, over 60 have earned advanced degrees, including 
doctorates from some of the most prestigious academic institutions 
in North America (Indiana University, University of Michigan, 
Pennsylvania State University, the University of Pennsylvania’s 
Wharton School, and Stanford University to name a few). 
More than 45 Gannon MBA’s are currently teaching in colleges 
and universities.
The purpose of the Gannon University Online Master of Business 
Administration Program is to develop leaders with a sound 
understanding of the role of business in society. Globally accredited 
by ACBSP (Accreditation Council for Business Schools and 
Programs), our program centers on honing ethical decision making 
and problem solving skills via content with an applied, practical 
application, in the functional areas of business. Our dedicated 
faculty offer a dynamic and diverse learning experience for students, 
whereby our graduates are equipped with transferable skills that 
are easily adapted to different areas of business, government, and 
industry, both domestically and globally.
MISSION AND OUTCOMES  
OF THE ONLINE MBA PROGRAM
The mission of the Gannon University Master of Business 
Administration Online Program is to provide an ethics based 
graduate level education with an emphasis on practical knowledge 
and application in the functional areas of business. The program is 
grounded in sound business theory presented by faculty actively 
engaged in scholarship in the pure and applied fields of business.
To achieve the practical knowledge outlined above, the outcomes 
of the program ready students to:
1.	 evaluate and integrate core knowledge of the functional business 
areas using appropriate qualitative and quantitative tools
2.	 critically analyze and synthesize relevant cross-functional 
information to make a defensible recommendation towards 
solving complex unstructured business problems
3.	 develop effective leadership and ethics-based decision-
making skills, to support the welfare of both organizations and 
communities
4.	 apply best practices in team settings, collaborative projects, and 
online/remote environments
ACCREDITATION
The Business Administration program is accredited by the Accred-
itation Council for Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP), a 
global accreditation body for business schools.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
For all students:
•	 A Bachelor’s Degree in any discipline from an accredited college 
or university
•	 A cumulative undergraduate GPA of 3.0 or higher.
•	 If your undergraduate GPA is less than a 3.0 on a 4.0 scale, there 
are two options:
	
– 	 Take the GMAT and achieve a score of 1050 using the 
formula: 200 x (undergraduate GPA) + GMAT score.
	
– 	 GMAT requirement may be waived based on professional 
experience following the Program Director’s review of 
application
•	 A completed application for admission
•	 Official transcripts from all prior institutions
•	 TOEFL scores if English is not a first language
CURRICULUM
The Gannon Online MBA is a professional degree program. 
Students in the program have a wide variety of academic and 
professional backgrounds. For Online MBA candidates whose 
undergraduate degree is in a field other than Business and/or have 
not obtained the prerequisite skills required for the core courses, 
Gannon has partnered with Peregrine Academic Services for 
students to take Academic Leveling Courses (ALC).
43
Business Administration (MBA) – Online
An ALC is a course that provides a summary or overview of 
key concepts related to competencies required as foundational 
knowledge in the program. As a program prerequisite, the ALC 
sequence ensures that students have demonstrated an appropriate 
level of competency to maximize success with the online MBA core 
coursework. For the Gannon University Online MBA program, the 
ALCs will be completed by students holding a Bachelor’s degree 
in a non-business field. Upon successful completion of the ALCs, 
students may progress into the core curriculum requirements.
The Core curriculum contains 24 credits of required courses and 
there are 6 credits of electives available. The Online MBA degree 
is a total of 30 credits. The ALCs are not credit bearing courses. 
Online MBA Academic Leveling Modules (7 required)
Required for non-business bachelor’s degree holders only; Offered 
through Peregrine Academic Services:
•	 Foundations of Accounting
•	 Foundations of Quantitative Research Techniques and Statistics
•	 Foundations of Marketing
•	 Foundations of Business Integration and Strategic Management
•	 Foundations of Business Finance
•	 Foundations of Macroeconomics
•	 Foundations of Microeconomics
Gannon Online MBA Core Courses  
(24 credits total)
GMBA 601	
Managerial Accounting
GMBA 631 	
Organizational Culture, Creativity and Change
GMBA 641 	
Operations and Supply Chain Management
GMBA 651 	
Marketing Management
GMBA 661 	
Financial Management
GMBA 686 	
Leadership and Business Ethics
GMBA 736 	
Human Resource Management 
GMBA 799* 	 Business Policy and Strategy
* GMBA 799 must be taken during the student’s last semester in 
the Online MBA Program
Gannon Online MBA Electives  
(6 credits) (Select two (2) courses)
GMBA 735 	
Employee Relations and Employment/Labor Law
GMBA 752 	
Consumer Behavior 
GMBA 764 	
Investments
GMBA 774 	
Strategic Management
See Online MBA Program Director for other online graduate 
elective course options.
NOTE: Students who complete the online MBA degree program 
are eligible to earn the  Business Essentials online certificate with 
successful completion of the 12 required credits and appropriate 
GPA.
STANDARD ONLINE  
MBA GRADING SCALE
Numerical  
Grade
Letter  
Grade

Grade Points  
(per credit hour)
97+
A+
4.0
93-96.99
A
4.0
90-92.99
A-
3.7
87-89.99
B+
3.3
83-86.99
B
3.0
80-82.99
B-
2.7
77-79.99
C+
2.3
70-76.99
C
2.0
Below 70
F
0
4+1 ONLINE MBA DEGREE PROGRAM
The 4+1 Online MBA degree program is designed to allow 
undergraduate students (from many disciplines) the opportunity 
to earn both an undergraduate degree and an online MBA within a 
five year period. Students from any major may apply and should 
do so before they begin their junior year. Working with both the 
undergraduate advisor and the Online MBA Program Director, 
the student will customize a schedule in which they will take 
graduate courses during their junior or senior years. Students who 
successfully complete these courses may apply to continue into the 
Online MBA program to complete the remaining credits. Applicants 
to the program must have a 3.0 undergraduate GPA. Retention in 
the program requires that the student maintain a minimum of a 3.0 
GPA for their undergraduate studies. 
Students who do not have business undergraduate foundational 
knowledge through prior coursework will be required to obtain 
the core competencies through the Peregrine Academic Leveling 
Courses (ALC’s).
INTERNSHIPS
Gannon Online MBA students may, with permission of the MBA 
Program Director, accept placements in fields that are related to 
their academic studies. In some circumstances, these placements 
can be credit bearing and substituted for an elective course. Students 
may take a 3 credit internship for credit with the permission of 
the MBA Program Director, provided the experience adds to the 
student’s knowledge and ability in their chosen field of study.
44
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
ACADEMIC LEVELING COURSES
See Peregrine Academic Services Website for Descriptions of 
the Academic Leveling Course Modules below:
Foundations of Accounting
Foundations of Quantitative Research Techniques and Statistics
Foundations of Marketing
Foundations of Business Integration and Strategic Management
Foundations of Business Finance
Foundations of Macroeconomics
Foundations of Microeconomics
ONLINE MBA CORE COURSES
GMBA 601 Managerial Accounting
3 credits
Prerequisite: Foundations of Accounting
A study of the accounting information utilized in the control 
and evaluation of managerial decision making. The focus is cost 
accumulation, cost allocation and control. Critical attention is 
placed upon budgeting, cost-volume-profit relationships, and 
variance analysis as they relate to production, working capital 
management, and marketing decisions.
GMBA 631 Organizational Culture, Creativity and Change
3 credits
Prerequisite: Foundations of Business Integration and Strategic 
Management
The course addresses the application of the behavioral sciences to 
management. The focus is on the analysis of structure and behavior 
in work organizations as well as classical organizational theory.
GMBA 641 Operations and Supply Chain Management
3 credits
Prerequisite: Foundations of Quantitative Research Techniques 
and Statistics
The course is designed to introduce students to the principles of 
operations and supply chain management and their application in 
decision making. The topics covered include logistics, transporta-
tion, inventory management, warehousing, materials management, 
global supply, demand management, project management, e-com-
merce, finance, and network design.
GMBA 651 Marketing Management
3 credits
Prerequisites: Foundations of Marketing
An examination of the marketing system and the use of various 
marketing applications such as marketing research, advertising 
research, and consumer behavior to assist the marketing manager 
in the major decision areas of targeting, product planning, channels 
of distribution, personal selling, pricing, promotion, branding, and
development of integrated marketing programs.
GMBA 661 Financial Management
3 credits
Prerequisites: Foundations of Quantitative Research Techniques 
and Statistics and Foundations of Business Finance
A study of risk and risk management, including advanced analysis 
of the investment decision using the Markowitz portfolio model 
and the capital asset pricing model. Other areas of study include the 
financing and dividend decisions, sources of short and long-term 
capital, and current asset management.
GMBA 686 Leadership and Business Ethics
3 credits
Prerequisite: Foundations of Business Integration and Strategic 
Management
A study of leadership theory and how it impacts relationships in 
the organization and organizational performance. This course will 
provide a critical investigation of the ethical issues associated with 
decision making.
GMBA 736 Human Resource Management
3 credits
Prerequisite: None
The knowledge, skills, and abilities of the workers in a firm are 
its most valuable resource. This course helps students recognize 
the strategic importance of human resource management. The 
student will explore contemporary techniques of resource analysis, 
testing, recruiting, selection, training, appraisal, and compensation 
planning, and will integrate these techniques with the strategic 
focus of the firm.
GMBA 799 Business Policy and Strategy
3 credits
Prerequisite: Open only to students who are in their final semester 
of Online MBA course work and Foundations of Macroeconomics 
and Foundations of Microeconomics
In this course, the student will apply functional expertise to actual 
strategic issues. The students will be challenged to assess real 
managerial problems, to integrate all of the skills developed in the 
MBA curriculum, and to develop well-reasoned, innovative, and 
practical solutions to these problems.
ONLINE MBA ELECTIVE COURSES
GMBA 735 Employee Relations  
and Employment/Labor Law
3 credits
Prerequisite: GMBA 631 – Organizational Culture, Creativity and 
Change 
A survey of labor law issues designed to give the student a 
fundamental, practical, working knowledge of the impact of various 
federal, state and local laws on the workplace The distinctive nature 
of management of a unionized workforce will also be studied 
focusing upon union avoidance, certification and decertification 
elections, collective bargaining, arbitrations, and other elements 
of employee relations.
45
Business Administration (MBA) – Business Analytics
GMBA 752 Consumer Behavior
3 credits
Prerequisite: GMBA 651 – Marketing Management 
Examines the social and psychological inﬂuences on individual, 
household, and organizational buyer behavior and explores models 
of buyer behavior and consumer research by applying them to 
marketing decision-making processes.
GMBA 764 Investments
3 credits
Prerequisite: GMBA 661 – Financial Management 
A survey of financial instruments and financial markets focusing 
on the risk and return characteristics of such financial instruments 
as stocks, bonds, options, futures, tax shelters, real estate, and 
precious metals.
GMBA 774 Strategic Management
3 credits
Prerequisites: Foundations of Business Integration and Strategic 
Management 
A study of how the organization plans for its long term survival 
based on analysis of the impact of changes in the economic, social, 
legal, competitive, and technological environments. Uses of long 
range strategic planning for competitive advantage are examined 
and discussed.
GMBA 796 MBA Internship
1 credit
Prerequisite: Permission of the MBA Program Director.
Students are placed in work roles related to their professional 
interests and supervised by both a faculty member and a fi 
coordinator. The student applies knowledge and skills learned 
throughout the curriculum. The student will maintain a journal, 
submit a paper reflecting on the work experience in the context of 
the academic experience, and make a final presentation. Students 
are expected to work a minimum of 50 hours for a total of 1 credit. 
GMBA 797 MBA Internship
3 credits
Prerequisite: Permission of the MBA Program Director.
Students are placed in work roles related to their professional 
interests and supervised by both a faculty member and a field 
coordinator. The student applies knowledge and skills learned 
throughout the curriculum. The student will maintain a journal, 
submit a paper reflecting on the work experience in the context of 
the academic experience, and make a final presentation. Students 
are expected to work a minimum of 150 hours for a total of 3 credits. 
Business 
Administration 
(MBA) – Business 
Analytics
Director: Celene M. McIntyre, DBA
INTRODUCTION
Gannon University is a student-oriented teaching university. This 
philosophy guides our approach to curriculum design, teaching, 
and advising. We recognize and understand the dramatic changes 
ongoing in the world of business. 
The MBA in Business Analytics program is designed to offer 
students a contemporary learning experience by infusing the 
application of technology and data analysis into coursework 
covering the functional areas of business. Students will apply 
the appropriate methodologies for analyzing data in the context 
of a specific business perspective in courses such as business 
forecasting, financial modeling, and data-driven strategic planning. 
With a focus on utilization of today’s modern business tools to 
analyze data and make data-driven decisions in any of the functional 
areas of business, graduates of the MBA in Business Analytics will 
be prepared for employment across a broad spectrum of disciplines, 
including marketing, supply chain management, human resources, 
and finance. Consistent with Gannon’s entrepreneurial spirit, the 
MBA in Business Analytics will also include coursework designed 
to develop a student’s entrepreneurial mindset, identify, and assess 
business opportunities and even finance a potential venture.
Gannon University’s MBA program was founded in 1970 and 
our experience as the region’s first and largest graduate school 
of business has taught us some important lessons. Simply having 
a master’s degree, regardless of the type of degree or apparent 
status of the degree-granting institution, is no assurance of success. 
To succeed in business, individuals need applicable skills, an 
understanding of the complex business environment and an 
appreciation for the value of work itself. Our network of over 1,400 
MBA alumni is a proud testament to Gannon’s ability to make 
success happen for its graduate students. Gannon MBA Alumni 
include Presidents/CEO’s, Vice Presidents, CFO’s, Treasurers, 
and Managing Partners. In addition, over 60 have earned advanced 
degrees, including doctorates from some of the most prestigious 
academic institutions in North America (Indiana University, 
University of Michigan and University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton 
School, Stanford University to name a few). More than 45 Gannon 
MBA’s are currently teaching in colleges and universities.
46
MBA IN BUSINESS ANALYTICS 
CURRICULUM
The program requires the following 30 credits of study; 
each course is 3 credits; see course descriptions for prerequisites. 
GMBA 610	
Business Analytics
GMBA 611	
Organizational Design & Leadership
GMBA 612	
Database Design and SQL
GMBA 620	
Data Analytics for Accounting
GMBA 621	
Predictive Analytics & Data Mining
GMBA 622	
Marketing Analytics
GMBA 623	
Operations & Technology Management
GMBA 634	
Data Visualization for Business
GMBA 635	
Financial Management & Modeling 
GMBA 730	
Consulting Practicum 
OUTCOMES OF THE MBA IN 
BUSINESS ANALYTICS PROGRAM
Upon successful completion of the program requirements, students 
will be able to:
•	 Analyze data and apply managerial skills to identify business 
problems, manage risk, or identify and create new business 
opportunities and propose data-driven recommendations or 
solutions
•	 Display competence with oral, written and graphical 
communications, appropriate for professional business 
environments
•	 Demonstrate appropriate leadership skills while recognizing 
and assessing moral and ethical components and complexity 
of challenges faced by global businesses 
•	 Translate and communicate results of business analytic projects 
into action that meets a desired outcome
ACCREDITATION
The Master of Business Administration program is accredited by 
the Accreditation Council for Business Schools and Programs 
(ACBSP), a global accreditation body for business schools.
STEM CERTIFIED
The Gannon University MBA in Business Analytics is a STEM 
Designated Degree Program. This designation makes it possible 
for international graduates to remain in the United States for an 
additional 24 months after graduation and receive training through 
work experience. 
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
For all students: 
•	 A Bachelor’s Degree in any discipline from an accredited college 
or university
•	 A cumulative undergraduate GPA of 3.0 or higher.
•	 If your undergraduate GPA is less than a 3.0 on a 4.0 scale, there 
are two options:
	
– 	 Take the GMAT and achieve a score of 1050 using the 
formula: 200 x (undergraduate GPA) + GMAT score.
	
– 	 GMAT requirement may be waived based on professional 
experience following the Program Director’s review of 
application
•	 A completed application for admission
•	 Official transcripts from all prior institutions
•	 TOEFL scores if English is not a first language
NOTE: For Global Students applying from India: Business 
and Business related 3-year degrees with relevant GPA and other 
requirements from “NAAC” grade B or higher accredited univer-
sities in India, subject to taking prerequisite courses as needed, 
are considered for Admission to the MBA in Business Analytics.
PREREQUISITE COMPETENCIES – 
ACADEMIC LEVELING COURSES
The Gannon MBA in Business Analytics is a professional degree 
program. Our students have varied academic and professional 
backgrounds. For MBA candidates whose undergraduate degree is 
in a field other than Business and/or those who have not obtained 
the prerequisite competencies required for the core courses, Gannon 
has partnered with Peregrine Academic Services for students to 
take Academic Leveling Courses (ALC).
An ALC is a course that provides a summary or overview of 
key concepts related to competencies required as foundational 
knowledge for entry into the program. As a program prerequisite, 
the ALC sequence ensures students have demonstrated an 
appropriate level of competency in order to maximize success 
with the MBA core coursework. For the Gannon University MBA 
program, the ALCs will be completed by all students holding a 
Bachelor’s degree in a non-business field.
The curriculum contains 30 credits of required courses. The ALCs 
are not credit bearing courses. 
The following competencies, obtainable through ALCs if not part 
of the students’ undergraduate degree requirements, must be met 
before starting the MBA in Business Analytics core curriculum: 
•	 Foundations of Accounting
•	 Foundations of Quantitative Research Techniques and Statistics
•	 Foundations of Marketing
•	 Foundations of Business Integration and Strategic Management
•	 Foundations of Business Finance
•	 Foundations of Microeconomics
47
Business Administration (MBA) – Business Analytics
STANDARD MBA GRADING SCALE
Numerical  
Grade
Letter  
Grade

Grade Points  
(per credit hour)
97+
A+
4.0
93-96.99
A
4.0
90-92.99
A-
3.7
87-89.99
B+
3.3
83-86.99
B
3.0
80-82.99
B-
2.7
77-79.99
C+
2.3
70-76.99
C
2.0
Below 70
F
0
4+1 MBA IN BUSINESS ANALYTICS 
DEGREE PROGRAM
The 4+1 MBA in Business Analytics Degree Program is designed 
to allow outstanding undergraduate students the opportunity to 
earn both an undergraduate degree and an MBA within a five-
year period. Students from any major may apply and should do 
so before they begin their junior year. Working with both the 
undergraduate advisor and the MBA Business Analytics Program 
Director, the student will customize a schedule in which they will 
take graduate courses during their junior or senior year. Students 
who successfully complete these courses may apply to continue into 
the MBA-Business Analytics program to complete the remaining 
credits. Applicants to the program must have a 3.0 undergraduate 
GPA. Retention in the program requires that the student maintain 
a minimum of a 3.0 GPA for their undergraduate studies. 
INTERNSHIPS
Gannon MBA students may, with permission of the MBA 
Program Director, accept placements in fields that are related to 
their academic studies. Students may take an internship with the 
permission of the MBA Program Director, provided the experience 
adds to the student’s knowledge and ability in their chosen field 
of study.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
PREREQUISITE COMPETENCIES –  
ACADEMIC LEVELING COURSES
Below competencies, met through the Peregrine Academic 
Level Courses or through undergraduate coursework, are 
prerequisites for all GMBA courses in the MBA in Business 
Analytics. All competencies must be met before students can 
begin coursework. See Peregrine Academic Services Website 
for Descriptions of the Academic Leveling Course Modules 
(non-credit bearing) below:
Foundations of Accounting
Foundations of Quantitative Research Techniques and Statistics 
Foundations of Marketing 
Foundations of Business Integration and Strategic Management 
Foundations of Business Finance
Foundations of Microeconomics
CORE COURSES
GMBA 610 Business Analytics
3 credits
Prerequisite: None
This course introduces data analytics, analytical tools, and the 
utilization of data to inform decision making. The goal is to 
demystify analytics, statistics, and their associated tools. Enabling 
students to thrive in a competitive market for data-based decision-
making. This course introduces statistical concepts and methods 
with emphasis on data analytics. To this end, the course will 
provide a comprehensive presentation of Microsoft Office Excel. 
In addition, students will gain foundational knowledge of databases, 
SQL and Python programming languages, Tableau and Microsoft 
Access. In combination, students will be able to effectively 
manipulate, analyze and visualize data. 
GMBA 611 Organizational Behavior and Leadership
3 credits
Prerequisite: None
This Organizational Behavior and Leadership course offers a 
comprehensive exploration of the fundamental principles and 
theories that shape the dynamics of organizations and the critical 
role of effective, ethical leadership in fostering organizational 
success. This course delves into the intricacies of human behavior 
within a professional setting and equips students with the knowledge 
and skills to become insightful leaders capable of steering teams 
towards positive outcomes and ethical decision making.
GMBA 612 Database Design & SQL
3 credits
Prerequisite: None
The Database Design & SQL course offers an in-depth exploration 
of the fundamental principles and practical applications of database 
design and SQL programming. This  course covers a wide range 
of topics, including entity-relationship modeling, normalization, 
SQL data manipulation and definition languages, advanced que-
rying techniques, transaction management and connectivity with 
programming languages. Through hands-on exercises, projects, and 
discussions, students will develop the skills necessary to design 
efficient and secure databases, write simple as well as complex 
SQL queries, optimize database performance, and effectively 
manage data in real-world scenarios. This course equips students 
with the essential expertise to address the challenges of modern data 
management, making them valuable assets in the field of database 
administration and development.
48
GMBA 620 Data Analytics for Accounting
3 credits
Prerequisite: GMBA610
In this course students will learn to interpret and manage vast 
amounts of data, transform data into meaningful insights, and 
articulate insights effectively to drive informed decision-making. 
They will gain hands-on experience in various data analytics tools 
and methodologies (i.e. Tableau, etc.) and learn to present their 
findings competently to managers and relevant stakeholders.
GMBA 621 Predictive Analytics & Data Mining
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMBA610
The course covers how to extract information from data sets, 
including the major steps of data mining and predictive analytics, 
such as data preparation, data modeling, and data evaluation. The 
techniques covered range from basic descriptive statistics to more 
sophisticated predictive techniques, such as linear and logistic 
regression, clustering, classification, and text analytics. The most 
popular Software (Excel and Python or R) exercises, case studies, 
and class projects will prepare the students to use these tools 
effectively during their career. 
GMBA 622 Marketing Analytics
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMBA610
This course will give students the opportunity to apply the skills 
they developed in programming and with software applications to 
gather, analyze and visualize data. Students will learn how to utilize 
these skills and tools to discover data relationships that lead to the 
development of marketing models. These will be used in real-world 
projects to develop and revise products and services, investigate 
pricing and distribution opportunities, and connect with potential 
customers to grow the business organization and meet competitive 
challenges through these data-driven approaches.
GMBA 623 Operations & Technology Mgmt
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMBA610
The objective of this course is to introduce students to the concepts 
and analytic techniques which are used to plan, control, and improve 
both goods and service operations. Students will use simulations, 
where they apply decision making techniques to monitor, control, 
and optimize a simulated operation over time. This course provides 
the framework for building an effective continuous improvement 
system, using strategy deployment along with lean and six-sigma 
techniques. The aim of this course is for students to understand 
value chains, and how they are affected by operational decisions. 
Topics include project management, capacity planning, forecasting, 
inventory management, distribution management, transportation, 
logistics, strategy deployment, lean, six sigma, finance, and 
incentive systems.
GMBA 634 Data Visualization for Business
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMBA620
This course introduces students to various techniques for adept data 
visualization, regardless of scale. Students will gain the proficiency 
to transform seemingly inconsequential data into visually impactful 
presentations that reveal meaningful insights. This course is tailored 
to provide students with comprehensive knowledge and hands-on 
experience in data visualization using business intelligence software 
(Tableau) and Python. Students will learn to use Tableau features 
to craft informative and engaging visual data representations 
in minutes. They will also learn the fundamentals of Python 
programming for visualizing data and work with various Python 
libraries such as Matplotlib and Seaborn. Real-world datasets will 
be employed to practice and hone these skills.
GMBA 635 Financial Management and Modeling
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMBA 621
This course applies analytical techniques and modeling to the study 
of corporate finance and capital markets. The course emphasizes 
the cost of capital, forecasting, capital budgeting, sources of short 
and long term capital, corporate distributions, and working capital 
management. Students will be immersed in real-life financial data 
analytics through the use of data mining and associated tools, 
such as SAP/SAS and Microsoft Excel. In addition, students’ 
analytical skills will be honed using techniques such as scenario 
and sensitivity analysis, optimization and regression.
GMBA 665 Operations and Supply Chain Analytics
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMBA 615 and GMBA 625
This course is designed to introduce students to the principles 
of operations and supply chain management, their application 
in decision-making, and an understanding of the available 
technology. Students will be introduced to frameworks and ideas 
that provide understanding into real-world business challenges, 
utilizing methods and analytical tools for tackling the challenges 
both quantitative and qualitatively. The goal of this course is for 
students to understand how operational decisions influence the 
overall value chain in both financial and non-financial metrics. 
The topics covered include logistics, transportation, inventory 
management, warehousing, materials management, global supply, 
demand management, project management, e-commerce, finance, 
and network design.
49
Business Administration (MBA) – Business Analytics
GMBA 675 Managing Organizational Behavior 
and Dynamics
3 credits
Prerequisites or Concurrently with GMBA 615 and GMBA 625
This course provides a comprehensive analysis of individual and 
group behavior effective communications in an organization. 
Emphasis will be on the organizational behavior and communication 
concepts and research findings related to the major challenges and 
opportunities managers face in the complex and ever changing 
technological environment of business. Topics that will be examined 
include job satisfaction, organizational commitment, motivation, 
conflict, trust, work teams, emotional intelligence, communication 
in organizations, decision making, power, organizational culture, 
managing organizational change, organizational structure and 
design, organizational change, and organizational innovation 
and creativity. 
GMBA730 Consulting Practicum
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMBA610, GMBA611, GMBA612, GMBA620, 
GMBA621, GMBA622, GMBA623
This course provides an opportunity to bring together all material 
learned throughout the program and synthesize it through a real-
world consulting project, simulation, and case studies. Explore 
and apply concepts to a future career through 1) identifying and 
understanding business challenges 2) applying analytic methods 
to discover insight to answer the business challenges, developing 
recommendations based on the findings and 3) communicating 
those findings and recommendations. This course is taken during 
the final semester of the MBA-BA Program.
GMBA780 MBA Internship
0 credit
Prerequisite: Permission of the MBA Program Director. 
Typically used for CPT purposes. 
Students are placed in work roles related to their professional 
interests and supervised by both a faculty member and a field 
coordinator. The student applies knowledge and skills learned 
throughout the curriculum. The student will maintain a journal, 
receive a supervisor evaluation, and submit a paper reflecting on 
the work experience in the context of the academic experience. 
Students are expected to work a minimum of 50 hours.
GMBA 796 MBA Internship
1 credit
Prerequisite: Permission of the MBA Program Director.
Students are placed in work roles related to their professional 
interests and supervised by both a faculty member and a fi 
coordinator. The student applies knowledge and skills learned 
throughout the curriculum. The student will maintain a journal, 
submit a paper reflecting on the work experience in the context of 
the academic experience, and make a final presentation. Students 
are expected to work a minimum of 50 hours for a total of 1 credit. 
GMBA 797 MBA Internship
3 credits
Prerequisite: Permission of the MBA Program Director.
Students are placed in work roles related to their professional 
interests and supervised by both a faculty member and a field 
coordinator. The student applies knowledge and skills learned 
throughout the curriculum. The student will maintain a journal, 
submit a paper reflecting on the work experience in the context of 
the academic experience, and make a final presentation. Students 
are expected to work a minimum of 150 hours for a total of 3 credits. 
(50 hours per credit hour).
50
Business 
Essentials 
Certificate – 
Online
Director: Rick Stachel, D.Sc., MBA
INTRODUCTION
Gannon University is a student-oriented teaching university. This 
philosophy guides our approach to curriculum design, teaching, 
and advising. We recognize and understand the dramatic changes 
ongoing in the world of business. Our approach is to pay careful 
attention to each student, challenge them to grow, and help them 
to reach their own personal and career objectives. Courses in the 
Business Essentials Certificate are rigorous and challenging by 
design, but the faculty is prepared to work with each student to 
build the skills needed for the business world of the 21st century.
The purpose of the Gannon University Business Essentials 
Certificate Program is to provide a flexible program to students 
seeking an opportunity for more in-depth business knowledge 
and/or seeking career advancement. This Graduate Certificate is a 
12-credit program that can be completed in one year. Courses are 
delivered online, in a 7-week format.
Students who complete the Online Business Essentials Certificate 
can continue into the Online MBA program. All 12 credits of 
required coursework from the Certificate will transfer towards the 
30 credit requirements of the Online MBA program. 
CERTIFICATE OUTCOMES
Upon successful completion of this certificate, students will be 
able to:
1.	 Critically evaluate evidence that influences decision-making 
in firms 
2.	 Articulate management issues, ideas, theories, and solutions to 
a range of audiences in written and oral form 
3.	 Apply knowledge to theory in problem-solving through the 
application of appropriate business theories, principles and data 
4.	 Explain the relationship among the core, functional areas of 
business and the context of their roles in today’s business 
environment 
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
For all students:
•	 A Bachelor’s Degree in any discipline from an accredited college 
or university
•	 A cumulative undergraduate GPA of 3.0 or higher.
•	 If your undergraduate GPA is less than a 3.0 on a 4.0 scale, there 
are two options:
	
– 	 Take the GMAT and achieve a score of 1050 using the 
formula: 200 x (undergraduate GPA) + GMAT score.
	
– 	 GMAT requirement may be waived based on professional 
experience following the Program Director’s review of 
application
•	 A completed application for admission
•	 Official transcripts from all prior institutions
•	 TOEFL scores if English is not a first language
ACCREDITATION
This graduate certificate is recognized by the Business Adminis-
tration program accreditation from the Accreditation Council for 
Business Schools and Programs (ACBSP), a global accreditation 
body for business schools.
CURRICULUM
The Gannon Online Business Essentials certificate is a professional 
program. Students in the program begin studies with varying 
academic backgrounds and professional experience. For Online 
certificate candidates whose undergraduate degree is in a field 
other than Business and/or who have not obtained the prerequisite 
skills required for the required courses in the certificate, Gannon 
has partnered with Peregrine Academic Services for students to 
take Academic Leveling Courses (ALC) to obtain the prerequisite/ 
foundational competencies.
An ALC is a course that provides a summary or overview of 
key concepts related to competencies required as foundational 
knowledge in the program. As a program prerequisite, the ALC 
sequence ensures that students have demonstrated an appropriate 
level of competency to maximize success with the online certificate 
coursework. For the Gannon University Online certificate program, 
the ALCs will be completed by students holding a Bachelor’s degree 
in a non-business field. Upon successful completion of the ALCs, 
students may progress into the required courses.
Online Academic Leveling Modules (5 required) 
Required for non-business bachelor’s degree holders only; Offered 
through Peregrine Academic Services:
•	 Foundations of Accounting
•	 Foundations of Quantitative Research Techniques and Statistics
•	 Foundations of Marketing
•	 Foundations of Business Integration and Strategic Management
•	 Foundations of Business Finance
51
Business Essentials Certificate – Online
Gannon Online Business Essentials Certificate 
Required Courses
GMBA 601	
Managerial Accounting 
GMBA 651	
Marketing Management 
GMBA 661	
Financial Management 
GMBA 774	
Strategic Management
STANDARD GRADING SCALE
Numerical  
Grade
Letter  
Grade

Grade Points  
(per credit hour)
97+
A+
4.0
93-96.99
A
4.0
90-92.99
A-
3.7
87-89.99
B+
3.3
83-86.99
B
3.0
80-82.99
B-
2.7
77-79.99
C+
2.3
70-76.99
C
2.0
Below 70
F
0
ACADEMIC LEVELING COURSES
See Peregrine Academic Services Website for Descriptions of 
the Academic Leveling Course Modules below:
Foundations of Accounting
Foundations of Quantitative Research Techniques and Statistics 
Foundations of Marketing
Foundations of Business Integration and Strategic Management 
Foundations of Business Finance
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
ONLINE MBA CORE COURSES
GMBA 601 Managerial Accounting
3 credits
Prerequisite: Foundations of Accounting
A study of the accounting information utilized in the control and 
evaluation of managerial decision making. The focus is cost accu-
mulation, cost allocation and control. Critical attention is placed 
upon budgeting, cost-volume-profit relationships, and variance 
analysis as they relate to production, working capital management, 
and marketing decisions.
GMBA 651 Marketing Management
3 credits
Prerequisites: Foundations of Marketing
An examination of the marketing system and the use of various 
marketing applications such as marketing research, advertising 
research, and consumer behavior to assist the marketing manager 
in the major decision areas of targeting, product planning, channels 
of distribution, personal selling, pricing, promotion, branding, and 
development of integrated marketing programs.
GMBA 661 Financial Management
3 credits
Prerequisites: Foundations of Quantitative Research Techniques 
and Statistics and Foundations of Business Finance
A study of risk and risk management, including advanced analysis 
of the investment decision using the Markowitz portfolio model 
and the capital asset pricing model. Other areas of study include 
financing and dividend decisions, sources of short and long-term 
capital, and current asset management.
GMBA 774 Strategic Management
3 credits
Prerequisites: Foundations of Business Integration and Strategic 
Management 
A study of how the organization plans for its long-term survival 
based on analysis of the impact of changes in the economic, social, 
legal, competitive, and technological environments. Uses of long-
range strategic planning for competitive advantage are examined 
and discussed.
52
Clinical 
Mental Health 
Counseling
Master of Science 
(M.S.) Degree
Director: Rebecca A. Willow, Ed.D.
INTRODUCTION
Gannon University offers the Master of Science in Clinical Mental 
Health Counseling. The M.S. in Clinical Mental Health Counseling 
is a 60 credit-hour program accredited by the Council for the 
Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs 
(CACREP). 
The program is designed to prepare individuals for careers in 
a variety of professional counseling settings such as outpatient 
mental health, human service agencies, college and university 
counseling, and residential treatment. The curriculum includes a 
blend of counselor training experiences designed to provide the 
skills and knowledge necessary to become a professional counselor. 
The program prepares graduates to pursue National Counselor 
Certification (NCC) and licensure as a Professional Counselor 
(LPC).
MISSION STATEMENT
The mission of Gannon University’s Clinical Mental Health 
Counseling Program is to educate and train students to become 
professional counselors who are committed to the wellness of 
individuals, families, groups, and the greater community. The 
philosophy of the program focuses on the development of the 
competencies required of professional counselors. The program 
objectives are (a) enhancing students’ knowledge of counseling 
theory and concepts; (b) developing strategies to facilitate human 
growth and development over the lifespan; (c) providing skills and 
training requisite of generalist entry-level counseling practitioners; 
(d) developing multicultural competencies; (e) promoting the 
development of sound legal and ethical decision-making skills; and 
(f) preparing individuals for national certification and professional 
licensure. Although students typically are drawn from the regional 
area, applicants with diverse backgrounds and from outside the 
region are encouraged to apply. Students are guided to embody 
and contribute to the spirit of diversity to which the program and 
profession are committed.
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES
Learning outcomes are statements of knowledge, skills and 
abilities an individual student possesses and can demonstrate upon 
completion of a program of study. Students graduating from the 
Clinical Mental Health Counseling Program at Gannon University 
are expected to achieve the following learning outcomes: 
1.	 Demonstrate understanding of the ethical, legal and professional 
	
spheres of counselor roles, responsibilities, and identity.
2.	 Demonstrate understanding of the complexities of social 	
.
	
and cultural contexts for individuals and their implications for
	
 relationships.
3.	 Demonstrate understanding of human development across the 
lifespan and its significance for counseling relationships and 
strategies.
4.	 Demonstrate understanding of career development appropriate
	
to diverse needs and life experiences.
5.	 Demonstrate counselor characteristics, behaviors, interviewing, 
	
and counseling skills that influence the helping relationship.
6.	 Demonstrate understanding of the dynamics, strategies, and
 	 conditions associated with group work effectiveness
7.	 Demonstrate competent use of assessment and diagnosis of 
mental and emotional disorders and conditions.
8.	 Demonstrate competent use of research methods, needs
	
assessment, and program evaluation skills important to the 
	
counseling profession.
9.	 Demonstrate case conceptualization, diagnosis, and treatment 
	
planning skills within the context of clinical mental health 
	
counseling.
10.	Demonstrate self-awareness and self-development through
 	 engagement in active learning and reflectivity.
DIVERSITY STATEMENT
The Clinical Mental Health Counseling Program establishes and 
supports an environment that values the diverse and unique nature 
of human experiences and backgrounds. We enrich our personal 
and professional lives by exemplifying Gannon University’s call 
to demonstrate professional respect for the dignity of every person.
PROGRAM ADMISSION 
REQUIREMENTS
Students must have a bachelor’s degree from an approved institution. 
A complete application for admissions includes: a resume, three 
letters of recommendation from appropriate professionals, an essay, 
and participation in an admissions interview. To be admitted into 
the program, applicants must have a minimum grade point average 
of 2.8 in undergraduate coursework. Students must also have 
Pennsylvania Child Abuse History clearance and the Pennsylvania 
State Police Criminal Record Check (ACT 33 and ACT 34 
clearances) dated within a year of application. Formal admittance 
to the program is required before enrolling in courses. Program 
director approval may be given for students to transfer up to 12 
semester hours of credits earned at a CACREP accredited program. 
Program director approval may be given for students to transfer up 
53
Clinical Mental Health Counseling
to six semester hours of credits earned at a non-CACREP accredited 
institution, subject to Gannon University Graduate program policy.
International applicants must provide evidence of successful 
achievement on the TOEFL of 95 and/or 7.0 on the International 
English Language Testing System (IELTS) and demonstrate 
basic fluency in American English and culture. Examination sub- 
scores will also be considered as important to overall applicant 
qualification. Other requirements are: A 500-word self-written 
personal essay in English; evidence of successful completion of 
an in-person undergraduate course taught in English in the United 
States or Canada; a minimum 5-minute video recording on “how 
the CMHC degree fits my professional goals”; and appropriate 
criminal/child abuse background clearances.
Undergraduate Course Work
Students enter the Clinical Mental Health Counseling Program from 
a variety of undergraduate backgrounds. Course work in human 
services, psychology, statistics, and human development is helpful. 
Several courses in psychology are recommended. 
ACCREDITATION
The Clinical Mental Health Counseling Program is accredited 
by the Council for the Accreditation of Counseling and Related 
Educational Programs (CACREP). CACREP is the professional 
accrediting body for counselor education and promotes the 
professional competence of counseling and related practitioners 
through preparation standards, excellence in program development, 
and accreditation of professional preparation programs. For further 
information on accreditation, contact: CACREP, 1001 North Fairfax 
Street, Suite 510, Alexandria, VA 22314. Phone: (703) 535-5990. 
Website: www.cacrep.org.
CURRICULUM
I.	 Master’s Degree in Clinical Mental Health Counseling  
Core Courses
1. 	Foundations of Professional Counseling Sequence  
(12 credits)
	
GCOU 605		
Group Dynamics	
3
	
GCOU 608		
Human Development Over the Life Span 	
3
	
GCOU 627 	
Professional Counseling 	
3
	
GCOU 648 	
Counseling Strategies and Techniques 	
3
 
2.	 Counseling Core I Sequence (12 credits)
	
GCOU 603		
Research Methodology	
3
	
GCOU 610		
Counseling and Personality Theories 	
3
	
GCOU 613		
Appraisal in Counseling	
3
	
GCOU 625		
Multicultural Issues in Counseling	
3
3. 	Counseling Core II Sequence (15 credits)
	
GCOU 612		
Family Systems	
3
	
GCOU 622		
Career Development and Counseling 	
3
	
GCOU 631		
Diagnosis and Treatment Planning 	
3
	
GCOU 642		
Child and Adolescent Counseling	
3
	
GCOU 690		
Seminar in Counseling	
3
	
	 	 	
	
(GCOU 690 and 691 must be completed 	
.
after the Counseling Core II sequence 	
.
and prior to or concurrent with enrolling  
in GCOU 651)
	
GCOU 691		
Counselor Preparation	
0
4.	 Advanced Core Sequence (12 credits)
	
GCOU 649		
Mental Health Counseling	
3
	
GCOU 660		
Counseling and Spirituality	
3
	
GCOU 667		
Crisis and Disaster Counseling	
3
	
GCOU 668		
Addictions Counseling	
3
5.	 Supervised Counseling Experience (9 credits)
	
GCOU 650		
Supervised Practicum 	
3
	
GCOU 651		
Supervised Internship 	
6
II.	Comprehensive Examination
Each candidate will be required to pass a comprehensive 
examination during GCOU 691 Counselor Preparation.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Clearances
Clinical Mental Health Counseling Program applicants must present 
an acceptable Pennsylvania Child Abuse History clearance and an 
acceptable Pennsylvania State Police Criminal Record Check (ACT 
33 and ACT 34 clearances). Clearances must be dated within a 
year of application. Applicants with documented criminal or abuse 
records will be evaluated on an individual basis for acceptance in 
the program.
Licensure
Professional counselors are licensed by the Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania State Board of Social Workers, Marriage and Family 
Therapists, and Professional Counselors. The overall goal of the 
Clinical Mental Health Counseling Program is to provide academic 
preparation for graduates to become Licensed Professional 
Counselors. There are additional postgraduate clinical supervision 
requirements in order to attain licensure. For further information 
on licensure, contact: State Board of Social Workers, Marriage and 
Family Therapists, and Professional Counselors, P. O. Box 2649, 
Harrisburg, PA 17105-2649 Phone: (717) 783-1389.
National Certification
The National Board for Certified Counselors (NBCC) administers 
the National Counselor Examination (NCE). Gannon University 
sponsors the GSA-NCC program for students. Graduates of 
CACREP accredited programs receive their NCC soon after 
graduation from the program. The NCE is also used for LPC 
licensure in Pennsylvania. Graduates are encouraged to pursue 
both national certification and licensure. For further information 
on NBCC, contact: NBCC 33 Terrace Way, Greensboro, NC 27403. 
Phone: (336) 547-0607. Website: www.nbcc.org.
54
Post-Graduate Coursework
Individuals who have completed a Master’s degree in counseling 
may take courses in the Clinical Mental Health Counseling Program 
in order to meet the requirements for licensure. All post-graduate 
students must apply to the Office of Graduate Admissions and be 
approved by the program director.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GCOU 603 Research Methodology	
3 credits
This course provides an understanding of principles and methods 
of counseling research and program evaluation including 
quantitative and qualitative analysis. Students will learn to critically 
evaluate counseling research, literature, consider ethical issues 
relevant to counseling research, and identify how research and 
program evaluation can improve counseling effectiveness. It is 
strongly recommended that students have taken an undergraduate 
statistics course.
GCOU 605 Group Dynamics 	
3 credits
This course provides an understanding of group counseling, group 
dynamics, types of groups, and group leadership. Students will 
experience integrative learning by participating in a developmental 
process group. Guidelines for group treatment, ethics, and diversity 
will be discussed. 
GCOU 608 Human Development Over the Life Span	
3 credits
This course provides an understanding of human growth and 
development over the life span including theoretical approaches 
and issues relevant to human services. It emphasizes physiological, 
cognitive, social, emotional, personality, spiritual, and moral 
development from conception to death. Legal and ethical issues 
related to human development, as well as diversity issues, will be 
reviewed in relation to human services. 
GCOU 610 Counseling and Personality Theories	
3 credits
This course provides an overview of the major theories in 
counseling and psychotherapy. The theoretical and historical 
backgrounds will be reviewed along with current practices. The 
strengths, limitations, and appropriate use of major counseling 
theories will be reviewed. This course will help students consider 
their own evolving theoretical orientation applicable to professional 
counseling settings and diverse client populations.
GCOU 612 Family Systems	
3 credits
This course provides an understanding of family systems theory 
and several major approaches to family therapy. Couples therapy 
and parent training will also be reviewed. Students will gain an 
understanding for assessing, conceptualizing, and intervening 
with families. 
GCOU 613 Appraisal in Counseling
3 credits
This course provides an understanding of individual and group 
approaches to assessment and evaluation in professional counseling. 
Emphasis is placed on all aspects of clinical assessment including 
risk assessment, personality assessment, assessing achievement, 
intelligence assessment, and career testing. Students will have the 
opportunity to administer selected assessment instruments.
GCOU 622 Career Development and Counseling
3 credits
This course provides an introduction to the theoretical bases of 
career development and individual career decision making. It 
incorporates career assessment instruments and techniques for 
evaluating individuals relevant to career development, planning and 
placement. Emphasis is placed on understanding career, educational 
and labor market information, technology in career counseling, 
legal and ethical standards, multicultural and gender bias as well 
as an appreciation for career trends across the life-span. 
GCOU 625 Multi-Cultural Issues in Counseling
3 credits
This course provides an overview of the theories of multicultural 
counseling and development. Issues related to social and cultural 
diversity will be examined as well as guidelines for developing 
multicultural competencies. An experiential focus is designed to 
increase sensitivity in counseling.
GCOU 627 Professional Counseling
3 credits
This course provides an introduction to the field of professional 
counseling. Multiple aspects of counselor professional identity 
and the specific role of clinical mental health counselors will 
be explored. Counselor roles, legal and ethical standards, 
organizational affiliations, and credentialing will be reviewed. 
Counselor preparation and training as well as professional 
development will be explored.
GCOU 631 Diagnosis and Treatment Planning
3 credits
This course provides an understanding of diagnosis according to 
the DSM and the practice of treatment planning. Emphasis is placed 
on differential diagnosis, the etiologies of mental and emotional 
disorders, as well as the cultural, contextual, and ethical issues 
related to the development of a diagnosis and treatment plan. 
Students will demonstrate diagnostic and treatment planning skills. 
GCOU 642 Child and Adolescent Counseling
3 credits
This course provides specialized knowledge and skills training in 
counseling children and adolescents. Students will learn to assess 
behavior and incorporate developmentally, culturally, ethnically, 
legally, and gender appropriate strategies and techniques to 
meet the needs of counseling children and adolescents. Students 
will examine various theoretical, behavioral, and play therapy 
techniques for counseling children and adolescents. Special 
55
Clinical Mental Health Counseling
emphasis will be placed on the diagnosis of mental and emotional 
disorders related to children and adolescents according to the 
current edition of the DSM. 
GCOU 648 Counseling Strategies and Techniques 	
3 credits
This course provides training in the core counseling skills essential 
for the counseling relationship and effective treatment outcomes. 
Students receive supervised training through modeling, live 
observation, skill rehearsal, and video recording in the counselor 
training facilities.
GCOU 649 Mental Health Counseling
3 credits
This course will provide instruction and skills training in 
mental health strategies and techniques. Students will develop 
competencies in diagnosis and integrative treatment approaches 
for selected psychological conditions and behavior problems. 
Emphasis is placed on establishing a therapeutic relationship, 
case conceptualization, evidence-based treatment, and legal and 
ethical practice.
GCOU 650 Supervised Practicum
3 credits
Practicum provides preparation for internship through highly 
structured and supervised counseling practice. Students will 
demonstrate the basic competencies required of professional 
counselors, performing direct and indirect counseling services 
under supervision. 100 hours of counseling practice including 
individual on-site supervision and on-campus group supervision 
are required.
GCOU 651 Supervised Internship
6 credits
Internship provides 600 hours of supervised counseling experience 
in an appropriate mental health counseling setting. Students will 
perform direct and indirect counseling services under supervision. 
Emphasis is placed on counselor identity development, legal and 
ethical practice, and demonstration of multicultural and counseling 
competencies and case conceptualization. Students will receive 
individual on-site supervision and weekly on-campus group 
supervision. 
GCOU 660 Counseling and Spirituality
3 credits
This course will focus on understanding how spirituality is 
naturally integrated into the practice of professional counseling. 
Spirituality, spiritual issues, spiritual diversity, and ethical concerns 
will be examined. Critical topics, such as illness, death and 
dying, suicide, and trauma will be explored. Students will review 
guidelines and competencies for integrating spirituality into the 
counseling relationship. 
 
GCOU 667 Crisis and Disaster Counseling
3 credits 
This course provides a comprehensive overview of how crises, 
disasters, and trauma-causing events impact the practice of 
professional counseling. Students will develop competencies 
relating to the assessment and counseling of persons experiencing 
trauma, crises, and/or disasters. Emphasis is placed on 
differentiating between normal and pathological functioning as 
well as understanding crises and disaster coordination, emergency 
response, and interdisciplinary engagement. 
GCOU 668 Addictions Counseling
3 credits 
This course will examine addictions and addictive behaviors 
including strategies for prevention, intervention, and treatment. 
Course topics include the etiology, assessment and treatment of 
addictions, substance abuse, and co-occurring disorders. Treatment 
strategies such as harm reduction and motivational interviewing 
will be examined.
GCOU 680-682 Special Topics in  
Clinical Mental Health Counseling
3-6 credits
Special courses developed from study interests in various aspects 
of clinical mental health counseling including supervised clinical 
experiences.
GCOU 688 Directed Studies
1-3 credits
A directed study provides the advanced counseling student the 
opportunity to pursue knowledge and training in areas of interest 
within the counseling profession. The student will demonstrate a 
thorough investigation and understanding of the selected topic. 
GCOU 690 Seminar in Counseling 
3 credits
This seminar reviews counselor preparation for certification and 
licensure. Legal and ethical standards of practice and consultation 
in professional counseling will be emphasized and reviewed. 
Current professional issues will be explored as a capstone program 
experience.
GCOU 691 Counselor Preparation –  
Comprehensive Examination
0 credits
Students will be required to pass a comprehensive exam. This exam 
should be taken the same semester as GCOU 690.
56
Computer 
and Information 
Science
Program Director: Yunkai Liu, Ph.D.
INTRODUCTION
Computer and Information Science (CIS) has been one of the 
most dynamic field in recent decades. With a growing demand 
for computing professionals, the program is designed to provide 
advanced studies for those who wish to continue preparation for 
effective participation in computing professions. The program 
provides continuing education in advanced subjects for CIS 
professionals who wish to stay abreast of the rapidly changing 
technological world. Emphasis is placed on the development 
of the student’s skills for independent study and continued 
professional growth.
PROGRAM OUTCOMES
 After any of the programs of study leading to the degree of Master 
of Science in Computer and Information Science, the graduate is 
able to:
1.	 Elicit, document, and analyze the requirements for software 
systems
2.	 Obtain a comprehension of the evolving technology and its 
ramifications
3.	 Identify, plan, and manage the schedule and risks for the 
activities involved in software-based systems development
4.	 Provide a research contribution or development of value to the 
profession, industry or society
5.	 Exhibit skills to support continued development and improvement 
of their professional abilities
6.	 Exhibit skills necessary to make ethical decisions as a moral and 
conscientious individual and as a citizen of their professions, 
their society, and their place of employment
DEGREE OFFERED
The program offers a Master of Science in Computer and 
Information Science (MS-CIS) degree. It is housed in the College 
of Engineering and Business.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1.	 An applicant must present a baccalaureate degree in computer 
science, information systems, information science, software 
engineering, or a related field from a regionally accredited 
institution with a GPA of at least 2.5/4.0. A GPA of at least 3.0 
is required for applicants from non-computing background.
2.	 Completed graduate application
3.	 Complete resume
4.	 Transcripts from all prior institutions
5.	 Three letters of recommendation
6.	 TOEFL scores if English is not the first language
Factors for consideration include work experience in related areas 
of CIS and letters of recommendation. A committee appointed by 
the department chairperson will review applications for admission.
ADMINISTRATION
Retention is contingent on maintaining at least a 3.0 grade point 
average (GPA). The course work is expected to be completed within 
two years for full-time students and within six years for part-time 
students. The degree requirements are at least thirty credit hours 
of study.
Each academic semester typically consists of fourteen weeks of 
instruction, including one week for final exams. Some courses 
follow a 15-week schedule. Lectures meet fifty-five minutes per 
week for each credit.
Although it is anticipated that many of the courses in the program 
would be offered in evening sessions, no special requirements 
for either the students or instructors will be made. The courses 
are scheduled as regular sessions and classes meet in rooms 
appropriate for the course being taught. Courses requiring the use 
of lab equipment as part of their instructional model are taught 
in computer teaching labs and may include an additional lab fee.
The University’s policy is that a master’s degree program must 
be completed within six years of taking the first course. Only the 
Program Director and/or the Dean can grant exceptions.
WAIVER OF COURSES
Students must complete the waiver process within the first semester 
of beginning coursework. The foundations-series courses can be 
waived. The foundations-series courses are listed below.
•   GCIS 506		 Obj.-Ori. Programming in Java
•   GCIS 507		 Data Structures
•   GCIS 508		 Database Management Systems
•   GCIS 509		 System Analysis and Design
•   GCIS 510 		 Software Engineering
•   GCIS 580		 Programming in Unix
•   GCIS 581		 Introduction to Networks
Any of the foundations series courses may be waived in either of 
the following ways:
1.	 Waiver by Transcript
A waiver request is based upon previously completed undergraduate 
or graduate courses which are equivalent to the foundation course 
in question. The student must demonstrate the equivalency of the 
prior courses by completing a Course Waiver Form available in 
57
Computer and Information Science
the CIS office. The form is to be completed and returned to the 
CIS office. To waive a foundation course, the student must have 
taken the courses within the last seven (7) years and obtained at 
least a grade of B. Special circumstances may be considered where 
other factors demonstrate currency and proficiency in the subject. 
Transcript-based waiver notification may accompany admissions 
notification. Transcript waiver applications must be completed by 
the end of the first semester of enrollment to be applied to course 
waivers.
2.	 Waiver by Proficiency Examination
Students who are confident of and can substantiate a strong 
background in an area which is not reflected in their academic 
transcript (i.e., the courses were taken more than 7 years prior to 
admission, or the student did not achieve the appropriate grade) may 
request challenge examination(s) to demonstrate their proficiency. 
Proficiency exams must be scheduled and taken by the end of 
the first semester of enrollment to be applied to course waivers. 
Please contact program director for more details. Certifications 
from selected vendors may be accepted as a demonstration of 
proficiency. Currently, the department will accept certifications 
from Oracle for GCIS 506 and GCIS 508. CompTIA and Cisco 
certifications may be accepted for GCIS 581. Information about 
course waivers and certifications will be shared with students at 
the beginning of the semester. 
PROJECT REQUIREMENT
Each graduate student is expected to conduct a directed research/ 
development project or thesis for completion of the degree; (see 
Plans A and B below). To propose an independent project or thesis, 
the student requests a specific CIS faculty member as the project 
advisor to chair his/her review committee in agreement with the 
CIS faculty member. These are normally completed as part of 
the required GCIS 605 Scholarship Seminar course. Decisions 
about the topic, project advisor and the committee members are 
shared between the student and the review committee chair. The 
committee members participate in reviewing quality and content 
for the directed research project/thesis and its written component. 
These project proposals and formulation of graduate project/thesis 
committees must be completed prior to registration for any Thesis 
or Directed Research credits.
Proposal sessions are scheduled during the last weeks of each 
semester. Various communication channels are utilized to 
disseminate the procedure and deadline on signing up for proposal 
sessions. Students, who wish to register for GCIS 698/GCIS 799 
credits for the coming semester, must follow the communicated 
procedure and deadline to be scheduled in one of the proposal 
sessions.
The directed research project/thesis advisor directs the student’s 
work and determines when to recommend the manuscript for review 
by a faculty committee. The review committee is appointed by 
the usual academic approval sequence and consists of at least two 
full-time Gannon CIS faculty members familiar with the subject 
material and one optional member from outside the CIS department. 
The outside member can be from industry. The committee is 
responsible for supporting the student in their work and assessing 
the quality of the project. After final corrections are made in the 
project and/or supporting documentation, the student will give an 
oral defense of their work before the committee. The CIS faculty 
member who chairs the review committee becomes the student’s 
academic advisor.
Plan A (Thesis):
The candidate is required to submit a 6-credit thesis as part of 
the 30-42 credits of graduate course work and to pass a final oral 
examination on the thesis material and related subjects. Individuals 
considering further doctoral graduate studies are recommended to 
pursue the thesis option. The content should represent a researched 
and creative expression of the student’s advanced capability as a 
result of the graduate program. The thesis should be proposed and 
approved prior to the commencement of the thesis work. Proposals 
must be approved prior to registering for thesis credits.
Thesis students register for GCIS 799 Thesis when beginning the 
research effort and after having received agreement from a faculty 
member to be the chair of the student’s research effort. While 
enrolled in GCIS 799 Thesis, the student will be required to satisfy 
other department-stipulated activities such as attendance at research 
seminars, participation in research presentations, and writing- or 
research-improvement seminars. Students who elect to complete 
a thesis apply three of their thesis credits as a graduate elective 
within their course of study.
Plan B (Directed Research):
The student is required to complete a 3-credit independent/
team project and to pass a final oral examination covering the 
student’s project area and related subject areas. The content of the 
independent/ team project can be either (1) in-depth scholarship 
culminating in a publishable-quality manuscript or (2) study and 
development of a prototype-level application culminating in a 
publishable-quality technical report. The content should represent 
a researched and creative expression of the student’s advanced 
capability as a result of the graduate program. The directed 
research project should be proposed and approved prior to the 
commencement of the independent/team project work. Proposals 
must be approved prior to registering for project credits.
Directed Research students register for GCIS 698 Directed 
Research when completing the research effort and after having 
received agreement from a faculty member to be the chair of the 
student’s research effort. GCIS 699 Directed Research is used for 
larger, non-thesis research projects. While enrolled in GCIS 698 
and GCIS 699 Directed Research, the student is required to satisfy 
other department-stipulated activities such as attendance at research 
seminars, participation in research presentations, and writing- or 
research-improvement seminars.
58
THE CURRICULUM PLAN
The MS-CIS is a professional degree program. Students may begin 
studies with a wide variety of academic and work backgrounds. 
The MS-CIS curriculum may range from 30-42 credits depending 
upon past experiences. Upon commencement of graduate studies, 
students choose to complete their course of study in one of the 
defined degree options: Information Analytics (IA), or Software 
Engineering (SE).
Courses are presented in three general categories:
•	 Foundations Series: From 0 to 12 credits of (foundations series) 
classes. The series is designed to bring all students up to the 
same preliminary level while commencing the common body of 
coursework. Foundation courses can be waived (or challenged) 
on the basis of academic and professional experience. Please 
contact the CIS Office with questions about completion of 
Foundations-Series equivalencies prior to starting the program.
•	 CIS Core Courses: 12-15 credits of required coursework 
regardless of the option chosen. Two courses are outlined below.
 	 –   Scholarship Seminar: 3 credits of professional development 
work. This course focuses on topics providing foundations 
for success in advanced graduate work and in the workplace. 
Topics include communications, professional development 
and applied research methods.
 	 –   Project Series: From 3 to 6 credits of directed research 
(GCIS 698/699) or thesis (GCIS 799) work. Students 
must have completed 12 credits of graduate work, 
have completed all prerequisites including a formal 
proposal of their project to register for their project work.  
Students are encouraged to begin developing and planning 
their project work well in advance of the semester in which 
they register for their directed research or thesis credits.
•	 Option-specific Courses: 15-18 credits of coursework focused 
on a particular applied area in computer and information science.
The student must complete 30-42 credits of graduate coursework. 
Students must maintain a cumulative grade point average of at 
least 3.0 for the duration of their master’s degree program. A total 
of ten graduate level courses (500-level or higher), exclusive of 
foundations-series courses are required.
Master of Science in Computer 
and Information Science Options
The Master of Science in Computer and Information Science 
offers students three options, which allow the student to select 
a technology, analytical or a practical and applied focus for the 
application of computing technologies. These consist of Information 
Technology, Data Science and Software Engineering. Each option 
consists of 30 credits of graduate work beyond the foundations 
series, and each specifies its own foundations series courses. The 
specific courses of study for each option is described below.
COURSE OF STUDY  
FOR DATA SCIENCE (DS)
Data Science is a dynamic and fast-growing field at the interface 
of Statistics and Computer Science. The emergence of massive 
datasets containing millions or even billions of observations 
provides the primary impetus for the field. Such datasets arise, for 
instance, in large-scale retailing, telecommunications, astronomy, 
medical domain, volumes of documents and social media. The 
MS-CIS with Data Science option prepares students to understand 
major practice areas in data science. They can collect, organize and 
manage data, identify patterns in data using visualization, statistical 
analysis and data mining, develop actionable insight based on big 
data, communicate data analysis and findings to people across 
a broad range of industries. They meet the demand of careers 
including Data Engineer, Data Architect, Statistical Programmer, 
and Big Data Analysts.
In addition to the overall program outcomes, at the conclusion of 
the program of study, the DS-option graduate will be able to:
DS-1.		 Identify patterns in data using data mining techniques.
DS-2.		 Manage large-scale data and the practical issues surrounding 
how the data is stored, processed, and analyzed in the cloud
DS-3		 Extract knowledge from large amounts of text data
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
The Data Science Option requires 30 credits beyond 12 credits 
of foundations courses. Nearly all graduates from four-year 
Information Systems, Computer Science, Software Engineering and 
related programs are eligible to have all 12 credits of foundation 
series courses waived.
Foundations Series (12 credits):
Programming Fundamentals: GCIS 506 Object-Oriented 
Programming in Java and GCIS 507 Data Structures
Database Fundamentals: GCIS 508 Database Management Systems
Software Development: GCIS 580 Programming in Unix
Systems (3 credits): One course:
GCIS 514 – Requirements and Project Management 
Data and Statistical Methods (9 credits): Three courses:
GCIS 516 – Data-Centric Concepts and Methods
GCIS 523 – Statistical Computing 
GCIS 583 – Introduction to Cloud Architecture
Data Science (9 credits): Minimally three of four courses:
GCIS 655 – Data Mining (3 credits)
GCIS 656 – Text Mining (3 credits)
GCIS 657 – Big Data Analytics (3 credits) or
GCIS 658 – Data Analysis and Visualization (3 credits)
59
Computer and Information Science
Elective (3 credits): One of:
Approved GCIS Electives. Electives may be any non-foundations 
series GCIS course approved by the faculty advisor. These choices 
may include non-GCIS graduate-level courses with approval of the 
department chair. Students who successfully complete the GCIS 
799 course may waive one elective.
Professional Quality Module (3 credits): One course:
GCIS 605 – Scholarship Seminar
Research Project or Thesis: (3-6 credits): One of:
GCIS 698– Directed Research or
GCIS 698 and GCIS 699 – Directed Project/Research or
GCIS 799 – Thesis
COURSE OF STUDY FOR 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY (IT)
The MS-CIS with Information Technology Option is designed for 
students who wish to combine technical competence in information 
technology with knowledge of managerial and organizational 
issues. Students will have extensive skill and experience in the 
design and implementation of operational databases as well as 
the data warehousing, cloud computing technologies and related 
business intelligence technologies for managing the enterprise. 
They will be trained on the business intelligence techniques 
to discover knowledge from massive data sets along with the 
importance on data security. This option will prepare the student 
with the management and advanced technology skills needed to 
become a leader and decision-maker in the technology field. Career 
tracks include Database and Cloud Network Administrators and 
Designers, Data Security and Business Intelligence Analysts.
In addition to the overall program outcomes, at the conclusion of 
the program of study, the IT-option graduate will be able to:
IT-1.	 Understand database modeling, design and implementation
IT-2.	 Demonstrate knowledge of Cloud Computing Technologies
IT-3.	 Derive intelligence from large volumes of business data
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
The Information Technology Option requires 30 credits beyond 12 
credits of foundations courses. Nearly all graduates from four-year 
Information Systems, Computer Science, Software Engineering and 
related programs are eligible to have all 12 credits of foundation 
series courses waived.
Foundations Series (12 credits):
Programming Fundamentals: GCIS 506 Object-Oriented 
Programming in Java 
Database Fundamentals: GCIS 508 Database Management Systems
Network Fundamentals: GCIS 581 Introduction to Networks
Software Development: GCIS 580 Programming in Unix
Systems (3 credits): One course:
GCIS 514 – Requirements and Project Management 
Data and Statistical Methods (9 credits): Three courses:
GCIS 516 – Data-Centric Concepts and Methods
GCIS 523 – Statistical Computing 
GCIS 583 – Introduction to Cloud Architecture
Information Technology (9 credits):  
Minimally three of four courses:
GCIS 665 – NoSQL and RESTFul API (3 Credits) OR
GCIS 666 – Cybersecurity (3 Credits)
GCIS 667 – Cloud Networks (3 Credits)
GCIS 668 – Business Intelligence (3 credits)
Elective (3 credits): One of:
Approved GCIS Electives. Electives may be any non-foundations 
series GCIS course approved by the faculty advisor. These choices 
may include non-GCIS graduate-level courses with the approval 
of the department chair. Students who successfully complete the 
GCIS 799 course may waive one elective.
Professional Quality Module (3 credits): One course:
GCIS 605 – Scholarship Seminar
Research Project or Thesis: (3-6 credits): One of:
GCIS 698 – Directed Research or
GCIS 698 and GCIS 699 – Directed Research or
GCIS 799 Thesis
COURSE OF STUDY FOR  
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING (SE)
The Software Engineering (SE) option focuses on mobile computing 
and interactive software development. Software testing and quality 
assurance methods are weaved throughout the curriculum. Students 
develop interactive apps for iOS (iPad, iPhone) and Android.
In addition to the overall program outcomes, at the conclusion of 
the program of study, the SE-option graduate will be able to:
SE-1.		 Develop and deploy goal-oriented, high-quality interactive 
software systems
SE-2.		 Identify and apply effective engineering development 
techniques
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
The Software Engineering option requires 30 credits beyond 12 
credits of foundations courses. Nearly all graduates from four-year 
Information Systems, Computer Science, Software Engineering and 
related programs are eligible to have all 12 credits of foundation 
series courses waived.
60
Foundations Series (12 credits):
Programming Fundamentals: GCIS 506 Object-Oriented
Programming in Java
Data Structures: GCIS 507 Data Structures
Database Fundamentals: GCIS 508 Database Management
Systems
Software Design and Development: GCIS 510 Software
Engineering
Systems and Project Management (3 credits): One course:
GCIS 514 Requirements and Project Management
Data-Centric Design and Development (3 credits): One course:
GCIS 516 Data-Centric Concepts and Methods
Mobile Programming (3 credits): One of:
GCIS 521 Advanced Programming: iOS or
GCIS 522 Advanced Programming: Java for Mobile
Software Design and Development (9 credits): Three courses:
GCIS 533 Software Patterns and Architecture 
GCIS 634 Software Maintenance and Deployment 
GCIS 639 Interactive Software Development
Elective (6 credits): Two of:
Approved GCIS Electives. Electives may be any non-foundations 
series GCIS course approved by the faculty advisor. These choices 
may include non-GCIS graduate-level courses with approval of the 
department chair. Students who successfully complete the GCIS 
799 course may waive one elective.
Professional Quality Module (3 credits):
GCIS 605 Scholarship Seminar
Research Project or Thesis: (3-6 credits): One of:
GCIS 698 Directed Research or
GCIS 698 and GCIS 699 Directed Research or
GCIS 799 Thesis
PROFESSIONAL TRACK
Gannon partners with local industry in Erie, providing a two-year 
work-study program. The objective of the professional track is to 
present an academic program combined with application training 
on actual industrial problems to give students a targeted education, 
complemented by hands-on, real-world development exposure. 
Students are selected for the track based on academic background, 
leadership skills, and communication skills. The student is assigned 
a Gannon professor as a mentor while working at the industrial 
site. The mentor advises the student about academic work and 
guides the student on industrial projects. The projects are carefully 
chosen to reinforce classroom work and to develop the students 
into outstanding professionals. In addition to the mentorship in 
technical areas, the professor also mentors the student in leadership 
skills, work and personal ethics, and communication skills needed 
in the industrial workplace. The track requires students to work 
on projects half-time during the school year and full-time during 
the summer. Students receive full tuition and a yearly stipend for 
their work. Students need to apply and be accepted separately for 
the program. The number of students in the track is dependent on 
availability of industrial sponsorship.
CO-OP TRACK
The objective of the co-op track is to present an academic program 
combined with application training on actual industrial problems 
in computing and systems environments. The track is designed to 
give students a targeted education on real-world problems. Students 
may join the program after completing sufficient coursework to be 
successful in an industrial environment and receiving approved 
industrial sponsorship. International students participating in a 
co-op are required to contact the Office of Global Support and 
Student Engagement to apply for Curricular Practical Training 
before engaging in any co-op activity. Students accepted to the co-
op track are assigned a Gannon professor as a mentor. During each 
semester in which they are enrolled in the co-op track, students must 
be enrolled in GENG 700, GENG 701, or GENG 702. Students 
are expected to begin participation in the co-op as soon as they are 
accepted to the program. 
Students must complete 30 credits of graduate coursework beyond 
their foundations-series coursework in addition to their Graduate 
Professional Experience courses. Students must maintain a 
cumulative grade point average of at least 3.0 for the duration of 
their master’s degree program and fulfill all other requirements 
for their degree. Applications to the Co-Op Track should include 
an acceptance letter and the work proposed must meet both GU 
and DHS criteria.
FIVE-YEAR ACCELERATED  
B.S./ M.S. PROGRAMS
Three Gannon undergraduate degree programs (Computer Science 
(CS), Cybersecurity (CYSEC) and Software Engineering (SE)) 
provide significant background for and pathways to the different 
MS-CIS degree options. These programs may be completed in five 
years of full-time study. Students apply in their Junior Year. Students 
are required to maintain a 3.00 GPA in their undergraduate courses. 
When accepted, students will rearrange their graduation plan 
accordingly based on the curriculum provided in the corresponding 
undergraduate catalog sections – Accelerated 5-Year CS-MS-CIS 
Program, Accelerated 5-Year CYSEC-MS-CIS Program, and 
Accelerated 5-Year SE-MS-CIS Program. Six credits of identified 
graduate work can be counted toward the undergraduate degree; 
other MS-Equivalent courses can be counted for placement, but 
not credit toward MS-CIS degree requirements. Appropriate MS 
work can be counted as technical electives for those programs that 
require such.
61
Computer and Information Science
DEPARTMENT POLICIES
Incomplete Grades in CIS
Incomplete (“I”) grades for a course within the CIS Department 
require students to follow extra procedures in order for the “I” 
grade to be appropriately handled.
•	 Students must obtain confirmation from the course instructor 
to be assigned the “I” grade.
•	 The course instructor and student complete and sign an 
“Incomplete Grades” form before issuing the “I” grade. The 
form identifies required deliverables, expected delivery dates, 
and consequences for not following through on the work.
•	 The course instructor and student complete and sign a 
“Behavioral Contract”. The contract stipulates other activities 
and arrangements expected of the student in order to earn a grade 
in the course.
•	 The course instructor submits both forms to the department and 
to Graduate Records.
•	 If the “I” grade is assigned for either GCIS 698 Directed 
Research, GCIS 699 Directed Research, or GCIS 799 Thesis, 
then the student is also required to register for GCIS 697 (1 cr.) 
Directed Project in the semester when the incomplete work is 
being done. Registering for GCIS 697 Directed Project is to 
occur regardless of the other courses registered in the semester.
Research and Thesis Projects
All qualifying research and/or thesis projects must be successfully 
proposed to the department faculty and have a review committee 
assigned prior to course registration. Standards for project scope and 
proposal methods are managed by the department chair. Externally-
sponsored projects are encouraged, but not required. All projects 
must have a CIS Faculty member in charge of the work, with a 
supporting committee of two department faculty and optionally 
one external committee member. The committee is assigned by 
the chair prior to registration. The committee is responsible for: 
•	 Supporting the student in completing their work
•	 Approving changes to the defined work scope,
•	 Judging the quality of the project work through the written and 
oral presentations of the work. 
•	 Grading of these courses is by the committee as a whole.
Students are responsible to identify the project, stakeholders and/ 
or topics, and complete the project on their own. Students are 
encouraged to identify, and start work on their projects, especially 
requirements and exploratory research prior to proposing their 
projects. Students should register for their project or thesis credits 
in the semester that they expect to complete the project, not 
necessarily in the semester they start the project. Please see the 
chair with questions.
C-Grade Policy
Gannon graduate students are required to earn a grade point 
average (GPA) of 3.0 or better in order to successfully complete the 
graduate program. CIS graduate students are expected to maintain a 
semester GPA of 3.0 or better. Because of CIS scheduling patterns, 
the necessity of retaking a course to improve one’s GPA may cause 
the duration of one’s graduate studies to extend one year or more.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
FOUNDATIONS SERIES
Foundations-series courses may not serve as elective courses to 
satisfy MS graduation requirements.
GCIS 506 Object-Oriented Programming in Java
3 credits
Prerequisite: Satisfactory completion of undergraduate  
programming course
The course covers the application of object-oriented programming 
to software development which includes the general topics of 
encapsulation, inheritance, and polymorphism. Topics also include 
GUI objects, event-driven programming, and exception handling. 
Basic object-oriented design principles using UML diagrams are 
introduced to facilitate large scale software development.
GCIS 507 Data Structures
3 credits, Spring
Prerequisite: GCIS 506
An in-depth programming-based study of data structures and of 
algorithms for their manipulation. Arrays, tables, stacks, queues, 
trees, linked lists, sorting, searching and hashing are topics 
considered.
GCIS 508 Database Management Systems
3 credits, Spring
A skills-building course in the fundamentals of database design, 
creation, and operations. Course topics include the ability to create 
a project-based database and its associated queries.
GCIS 509 Systems Analysis and Design
3 credits, Fall
Prerequisite: GCIS 506
An introduction to the role and responsibilities of a systems analyst. 
Students examine systems by analysis, modeling, and design at the 
enterprise, process, logical, data, and technology levels. Optionally 
included topics are feasibility analysis, technology evaluation, 
project management, object-oriented analysis.
62
GCIS 510 Software Engineering
3 credits, Spring
Prerequisite: GCIS 506
An advanced treatment of methods for producing a software 
design, and the testing of that design and ensuing code. Focus is on 
object-oriented analysis and design methods, black-box (functional) 
testing techniques. Includes treatment of the developing Unified 
Modeling Language (UML) techniques and its application to 
software development.
GCIS 580 Programming in UNIX
3 credits
Prerequisite: None
Students are introduced to the UNIX system, shell programming 
and program development in the UNIX environment. Basic 
commands and utilities provided through standard UNIX or 
UNIX-dialect shell are covered. The UNIX command language 
interpreter and the ability to write routines within its structure are 
addressed. Course includes configuration and use of software tools 
for development of higher-order language compilation as well as 
the use of configuration management tools.
GCIS 581 Introduction to Networks
3 credits, Fall
Prerequisite: None
This course is designed to introduce the student to the fundamentals 
of network technology. The student will learn how to identify the 
different types of networks and to implement and support the major 
networking components including the server, operating system, and 
clients. Different types of media used in network communications 
will be explained. Students will learn how to use these media to 
connect clients to the network. Networking standards, protocols, 
and access methods will be introduced in order to create appropriate 
networks for a given environment.
500 SERIES
GCIS 514 Requirements and Project Management
3 credits, Fall and Spring
Prerequisite: None
The course focuses on the requirements engineering and project 
management process, and how these two practices are intertwined. 
Requirements engineering includes the study of tools, methods 
and description techniques applicable from initial requirements 
elicitation through to requirements validation. Along with the 
requirements engineering focus, the project management skills 
for managing software systems and projects are addressed. The 
course includes specific techniques for the analysis, modeling, 
validation, and management of requirements for engineering and 
a general introduction to the PMBOK terminology. Ethical practice 
of software engineering and information system development 
is addressed.
GCIS 515 Software Testing and Quality Assurance
3 credits, Fall
Prerequisite: GCIS 510 and (GCIS 506 or GCIS 521 or GCIS 
522) The course is concerned with understanding the role of 
quality assurance in the software development cycle and applying 
these techniques to software products. Course topics include test 
design methods, test planning, automated test support, quality 
measurement and quality tracking techniques.
GCIS 516 Data-Centric Concepts and Methods
3 credits, Fall and Spring
Prerequisite: GCIS 508
The course introduces the concepts and approaches necessary 
for data-centric design and development of high-quality software 
and systems. Incorporated in the course is an introduction to the 
systematic methodologies and tools required for the development 
and use of vital data connections.
GCIS 521 Advanced Programming: iOS
3 credits, Fall
Prerequisite: GCIS 506 and GCIS 510
The course treats the development of Objective-C programming 
language for application development, including an overview of the 
language and libraries, object-oriented development, source-code 
control and an introduction to testing. Project work will include 
the application of design patterns, user-interfaces, multi-threading, 
database connectivity and other relevant materials. The course 
includes introductory material in mobile design, and a variety of 
building blocks utilizing libraries and modes available to the mobile 
app developer in the iOS domain.
GCIS 522 Advanced Programming: Java for Mobile
3 credits, Spring
Prerequisite: GCIS 506 and GCIS 510
The course treats the development of the Java programming 
language for application development, including an overview of the 
language and libraries, object-oriented development, source-code 
control and an introduction to testing. Project work will include 
the application of design patterns, user-interfaces, multi-threading, 
database connectivity and other relevant materials. The course 
includes introductory material in mobile design, and a variety of 
building blocks utilizing libraries and modes available to the mobile 
app developer in the Java domain.
GCIS 523 Statistical Computing
3 credits, Fall and Spring
Prerequisite: None
The advancement of statistical methodology is now inextricably 
linked to the use of computers. The translation of a statistical 
problem into its computational analog (or analogs) is a skill 
that must be learned by actively solving relevant problems. This 
course focuses on training students to solve statistical problems 
using programming languages. The course includes specific 
63
Computer and Information Science
computational methods for the analysis, modeling, validation, and 
interpretation of various statistical problems derived from biology 
and business. It includes a special emphasis on statistical analysis, 
experiments design and the related computational solutions/
packages.
GCIS 531 Distributed Programming
3 credits, Spring
Prerequisite: GCIS 506 or equivalent
An introduction to the fundamental techniques and tools used to 
develop programs that rely on inter-process communication. Topics 
include TCP/IP, client-server paradigm, daemon programs, client 
socket calls, server socket calls, concurrent vs. iterative servers, 
connectionless and connection-oriented server paradigms.
GCIS 533 Software Patterns and Architecture
3 credits, Spring
Prerequisite: (GCIS 506 or GCIS 521 or GCIS 522) and GCIS 507 
and (GCIS 509 or GCIS 510)
This course is concerned with the issues, techniques, strategies, 
representations and patterns used to design and implement a 
software component or a large-scale system. Using the Unified 
Modeling Language (UML), it focuses on defining architectures 
that conform to requirements, achieve quality goals and work within 
constraints including resource, performance, reliability and security. 
The course includes project work that emphasizes the selection and 
appropriate use of architectural specification.
GCIS 555 Dynamic Web Development
3 credits, Fall
Prerequisite: GCIS 506 and GCIS 508
The course is concerned with the development of database systems 
and their application in multi-tiered systems. The student develops 
desktop and web-based database applications. Typical coverage 
includes event-driven programming.
GCIS 583 Introduction to Cloud Architecture
3 credits, Fall and Spring
Prerequisites: None
This course focuses on the configuration of networks for internet 
services, and how to deploy and maintain internet servers on 
multiple platforms. The course includes extensive laboratory 
work to support the installation and configuration of hardware and 
software to support networking, servers, and security for internet 
services, particularly on Windows and UNIX platforms. This 
course also includes discussion of the ramifications of internet 
service technologies. Finally, building of Network Balanced and 
High Availability Clusters that are the building blocks of forming 
a Cloud will be highlight of this course.
GCIS 590-595 Special Topics in CIS
1-3 credits
Prerequisite: Specific prerequisites are topic-related
The course offers presentation of topics that are emerging as the 
field of computer and information science changes. The objectives 
and content reflect the interests of the faculty and the students 
relative to the topic.
600 SERIES
GCIS 605 Scholarship Seminar
3 credits, Fall and Spring
Prerequisite: Completion of all foundation courses and 12 credits 
of post-foundation graduate work
The course emphasizes the skills necessary to perform effectively 
and professionally, and includes writing, listening, and presentation 
skills. The course focuses on posing a research question, gathering 
appropriate source materials, analyzing the current status of related 
materials, planning a valid study, defining project goals, selecting 
appropriate research and/or development methods and assessment 
techniques and formulating an effective project proposal. Review 
of professional and research ethics is included.
GCIS 634 Software Maintenance and Deployment
3 credits, Fall
Prerequisite: GCIS 521 or GCIS 522
The course introduces the concepts and approaches necessary for 
the maintenance and refactoring of software projects, particularly 
in a rigorous life-cycle process. The course focuses on materials 
related to software maintenance, process, metrics and quality related 
to the development and improvement of high-quality software 
and systems. The course includes significant project work where 
students apply a rigorous process to the refactoring of a software 
product to improve its features and quality.
GCIS 639 Interactive Software Development
3 credits, Fall
Prerequisite or co-requisite: GCIS 521 or GCIS 522
This course deals with developing interactive computer-based sys-
tems that allow users to complete meaningful tasks. This includes 
both the process and tools for exploring users’ needs, analyzing 
tasks and information flow, as well as identifying, defining and 
assessing usability factors through usability testing. Interface speci-
fication and iterative interface design and prototyping is addressed.
64
GCIS 655 Data Mining Concepts and Techniques
3 credits
Prerequisites: All foundation courses; GCIS 523 
The course introduces the multidisciplinary field of data mining, 
and the importance of data quality and cleaning. Included are the 
essential data mining and knowledge representation techniques 
used to extract intelligence from large data sets in order to discover 
patterns or within them. Techniques include advanced frequent 
pattern mining techniques, classification, and clustering methods. 
Students demonstrate their understanding of intelligent systems 
technologies in one or more applications.
GCIS 656 Text Mining
3 credits
Prerequisites: All foundation courses; GCIS 523 
This course covers foundations of text mining and text analysis, 
acquiring data, the logic of text mining, and techniques for web-
scrapping and web-crawling. It includes text mining fundamentals 
such as lexical resources, basic text processing and supervised 
learning. Included are text analysis methods from the humanities 
and social sciences such as analyzing narratives, themes, metaphors 
as well as text mining methods from computer science such as text 
classification, opinion mining, and information extraction.
GCIS 657 Big Data Analytics
3 credits
Prerequisites: All foundation courses; GCIS 583
The course introduces the fundamental concepts of Big Data 
management and analytics, challenges and applications. It 
includes MapReduce methodology for exploiting parallelism in 
clouds (racks of interconnected processors) to compute very large 
amounts of data. Algorithms for streaming data, web search, on-line 
advertising and recommender systems are also discussed.
GCIS 658 Data Analysis and Visualization
3 credits
Prerequisites: All foundation courses; GCIS 516 and GCIS 523 
The course contains three parts. The first part of course explores 
scripting for the data science pipeline. Students learn to acquire, 
access, and transform different forms of data, including structured, 
semi-structured and unstructured data. The second part of course 
explores complicated statistical models, focusing on regression 
models. The third part of the course focuses on data visualization, 
layered grammar of graphics, perception of discrete and continuous 
variables, introduction to Mondran, mosaic pots, parallel coordinate 
plots, introduction to ggobi, linked pots, brushing, dynamic 
graphics, model visualization, clustering and classification.
GCIS 665 NoSQL and The RESTful API
3 credits
Prerequisites: All foundation courses
The student will learn to set up a RESTful API using the Express 
Server to create endpoints needed to add, update, and delete data 
from a cloud (e.g. MongoDB) database. The course will cover mid-
dleware, testing in Node.js, application organization, data modeling, 
querying data with Mongoose, using Web Token Authentication 
(e.g. JSON), securing routes, and deployment.
GCIS 666 Cybersecurity: Ethical Hacking
3 credits
Prerequisites: All foundation courses
The course develops the structured knowledge base needed to 
discover vulnerabilities and recommend solutions for tightening 
network security and protecting data from potential attackers. 
Students focus on using penetration-testing tools and techniques 
to protect computer networks. This course provides students basic 
knowledge and skills in the fundamental theories and practices 
of Cyber Security. In addition, this course will provide a basic 
introduction to of all aspects of cyber-security including procedures, 
communications security, network security, defender website, legal 
issues, and technical issues. Also, it will support some technical 
approaches using in ethical hacking.
GCIS 667 Cloud Networks
3 credits, Spring
Prerequisites: All foundation courses; GCIS 583
This course builds from clustered servers to running different 
services and applications on a private cloud. The course includes 
extensive laboratory work to support the installation and 
configuration of a private cloud system. It provides a hands-on 
comprehensive study of cloud concepts and capabilities across the 
various cloud service models including Infrastructure as a Service 
(IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), Software as a Service (SaaS), 
and Business Process as a Service (BPaaS).
GCIS 668 Business Intelligence
3 credits, Spring
Prerequisites: All foundation courses
Advances in computing technologies have greatly enhanced our 
ability to collect and store large amounts of data, i.e. big data. Yet, 
corporations today are said to be data rich but knowledge poor. 
This course will introduce state-of-the-art Business Intelligence and 
Analytics techniques to discover knowledge from massive data sets 
using a hands-on approach. Students will have a chance to apply 
such techniques on real-world data sets in various domains, includ-
ing finance, healthcare, commerce and sports in order to produce 
actionable intelligence for enhanced managerial decision making.
65
Computer and Information Science
GCIS 690-695 Special Topics in CIS
3 credits
Prerequisite: Specific prerequisites are topic-related
The course offers presentation of topics that are emerging as the 
field of computer and information science changes. The objectives 
and content reflect the interests of the faculty and the students 
relative to the topic.
GCIS 697 Directed Project
1 credit
GCIS 698 Directed Research
3 credits
Prerequisites: GCIS 605 and GCIS 514
The course tracks the completion of an independent/team project. 
Passing a final oral examination covering the student’s project area 
and related subject areas and documenting the research project are 
part of its requirements for satisfactorily completing the course. 
The content of the independent/team project can be either an in-
depth scholarship culminating in a publishable-quality manuscript 
(hereafter referred to as a ‘research project’) or the study and 
development of a prototype-level application culminating in a 
publishable-quality technical report (hereafter referred to as a 
‘technical project’).
The project content represents a researched and creative expression 
of the student’s advanced capability as a result of the graduate 
program. The directed research project must be proposed 
and approved prior to the commencement of the independent 
project work.
GCIS 699 Directed Research
3 credits
Co-requisite: GCIS 698
The course complements GCIS 698 for larger research projects 
satisfying Plan B of the Project Requirement.
GCIS 799 Thesis
3-6 credits
Prerequisites: GCIS 605 and GCIS 514
The course tracks the completion of an independent research project 
and the final oral examination covering the student’s project area 
and related subject areas. The content of the independent, in-depth 
scholarship culminates in a publishable-quality manuscript (here 
after referred to as a ‘research project’).
The thesis work represents a researched and creative expression 
of the student’s advanced capability as a result of the graduate 
program. The thesis must be proposed and approved prior to the 
commencement of the independent project work. The credits may 
be taken as a six-credit block, or as two 3-credit blocks.
The following sample curriculums are for students who don’t 
need to complete foundation courses.
MSCIS-DATA SCIENCE  
CURRICULUM
FALL START
Semester 1
GCIS 516	
Data-Centric Concepts and Methods
GCIS 523	
Statistical Computing
GCIS 583	
Introduction to Cloud Architecture
Semester 2
GCIS 514	
Requirements and Project Management
GCIS 657	
Big Data Analytics
GCIS 658	
Data Analysis and Visualization
Semester 3
GCIS 605	
Scholarship Seminar
GCIS 655	
Data Mining or 
GCIS 656	
Text Mining
GCIS xxx	
Elective
(Project Proposal)
Semester 4
GCIS 698	
Directed Research 
SPRING START
Semester 1
GCIS 516	
Data-Centric Concepts and Methods
GCIS 523	
Statistical Computing
GCIS 583	
Introduction to Cloud Architecture
Semester 2
GCIS 514	
Requirements and Project Management
GCIS 655	
Data Mining
GCIS 656	
Text Mining 
Semester 3
GCIS 605	
Scholarship Seminar
GCIS 657	
Big Data Analytics 
or 
GCIS 658	
Data Analysis and Visualization 
GCIS xxx	
Elective
(Project Proposal)
Semester 4
GCIS 698	
Directed Research 
66
MSCIS-INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
CURRICULUM
FALL START
Semester 1
GCIS 516	
Data-Centric Concepts and Methods
GCIS 523	
Statistical Computing
GCIS 583	
Introduction to Cloud Architecture
Semester 2
GCIS 514	
Requirements and Project Mgmt
GCIS 665	
NoSQL and RESTFul API
GCIS 668	
Business Intelligence 
Semester 3
GCIS 605	
Scholarship Seminar
GCIS 666	
Cybersecurity 
or 
GCIS 667	
Cloud Networks 
GCIS xxx	
Elective
(Project Proposal)
Semester 4
GCIS 698	
Directed Research 
SPRING START
Semester 1
GCIS 516	
Data-Centric Concepts and Methods
GCIS 523	
Statistical Computing
GCIS 583	
Introduction to Cloud Architecture
Semester 2
GCIS 514	
Requirements and Project Mgmt
GCIS 666	
Cybersecurity 
GCIS 667	
Cloud Networks 
Semester 3
GCIS 605	
Scholarship Seminar
GCIS 665	
NoSQL *=&RESTFul API 
or 
GCIS 668	
Business Intelligence 
GCIS xxx	
Elective
(Project Proposal)
Semester 4
GCIS 698	
Directed Research 
MSCIS-SOFTWARE ENGINEERING  
CURRICULUM 
FALL START
Semester 1
GCIS 516	
Data-Centric Concepts and Methods
GCIS 521/2	
Advanced Programming
GCIS xxx	
Elective
Semester 2
GCIS 533	
Software Patterns and Architecture
GCIS 514	
Requirements and Project Mgmt
GCIS xxx	
Elective
Semester 3
GCIS 605	
Scholarship Seminar
GCIS 634	
SW Maintenance and Deployment
GCIS 639	
Interactive Software Development
(Project Proposal)
Semester 4
GCIS 698	
Directed Research 
SPRING START
Semester 1
GCIS 516	
Data-Centric Concepts and Methods
GCIS 521/2	
Advanced Programming
GCIS 514	
Requirements and Project Mgmt
Semester 2
GCIS xxx	
Elective
GCIS 634	
SW Maintenance and Deployment
GCIS 639	
Interactive Software Development
Semester 3
GCIS 605	
Scholarship Seminar
GCIS 533	
Software Patterns and Architecture
GCIS xxx	
Elective
(Project Proposal)
Semester 4
GCIS 698	
Directed Research 
67
Criminalistics
Criminalistics
Program Director: Ted Yeshion, Ph.D.
INTRODUCTION
The primary goal of the Master of Science in Criminalistics is to 
provide students with a theoretical foundation, while focusing on 
criminal investigative techniques and practical application. With 
hands-on experience, students will be able to apply terms, skills 
and techniques utilized in the field of Criminal Justice. There 
are currently 1.5 million full-time law enforcement officers in 
the United States. With the increased professionalization of the 
Criminal Justice field, many state and local police departments are 
beginning to require bachelor degrees, with graduate degrees being 
crucial to promotion. Furthermore, to be competitive, federal agents 
are increasingly in need of a graduate degree. Popular career paths 
include local and state police departments in addition to federal 
agencies such as FBI, DEA, and ATF. 
STUDENT LEARNING OUTCOMES
At the completion of this 36-credit program students will be able to:
1.	 Demonstrate an understanding of the scientific principles of 
crime scene investigation and reconstruction, including evidence 
collection and preservation. 
2.	 Demonstrate the capabilities, use, potential and limitations of 
forensic laboratory theory and techniques with respect to the 
analysis of evidence.
3.	 Utilize ethical principles and an understanding of legal 
precedents to make decisions related to investigative techniques, 
analysis of evidence, and courtroom testimony. 
4.	 Demonstrate problem-solving skills and synthesize forensic, 
evidential, and investigatory information from multiple sources 
to generate theories about crime. 
5.	 Conduct interviews and interrogations, develop and execute 
investigative plans, follow up investigative leads, document 
their findings, and testify to the interpretation of evidentiary 
findings in a courtroom setting. 
6.	 Integrate knowledge and skills through an applied capstone 
experience. 
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Applicants interested in the Master of Science in Criminalistics must 
hold a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college or university. 
The undergraduate degree does not have to be in criminal justice, 
but applicants are required to demonstrate a basic understanding 
and awareness of the criminal justice system. 
•	 Submit graduate application
•	 Submit final, official, transcripts from all colleges/universities 
attended 
•	 Submit three letters of recommendation
•	 Submit an updated resume
•	 Undergraduate degree (or expected completion of the undergrad-
uate degree prior to enrollment) preferably in criminal justice, 
natural science, computer science or related field.
•	 Successful completion of undergraduate-level coursework in 
the following courses, achieving a minimum grade of “C” in 
each: Introduction to Criminal Justice, Investigative Concepts, 
Natural Science course
•	 Minimum 2.75 overall GPA, 3.00 in prerequisite courses
•	 Act 33/34 and FBI background check clearance is needed for 
full acceptance
•	 A personal interview may be required. The student will be 
contacted to schedule an interview.
•	 All application materials must be submitted to the Graduate 
Admissions Office no later than August 1 (for Fall admission), 
November 1 (for Spring admission), or May 1 (for Summer 
Admission). 
•	 The graduate assistantship deadline is March 15.
CURRICULUM
Students can begin the program in the Fall, Spring, or Summer 
semesters. Flexible scheduling options are available.
Fall Course Offerings 
GCRIM 501:	  Crime Scene Techniques 
GCRIM 601: 	 Criminalistics
GCRIM 509: 	 Crime Mapping and Analysis
GCRIM 507: 	 Criminal Law of Evidence 
Spring Course Offerings
GCRIM 621: 	 Physical and Pattern Evidence 
GCRIM 508: 	 Courtroom Procedures 
GCRIM 611: 	 Digital Evidence 
GCRIM 631: 	 Applied Criminalistics
Summer Course Offerings
GCRIM 622: 	 Medicolegal Investigation
GCRIM 612: 	 Interviewing and Dispute Resolution 
GCRIM 602: 	 Psychology and the Law 
GCRIM 641: 	 Forensic Investigation Practicum 
ASSISTANTSHIPS
Graduate Assistantships are available for full-time and part-time 
students. Potential responsibilities of Graduate Assistants include:
•	 Assisting experienced faculty members with research
•	 Assisting faculty members with teaching responsibilities 
•	 Helping to manage the Forensic Investigation Center 
•	 Assisting with various programmatic duties
68
4+1 MS CRIMINALISTICS 
DEGREE PROGRAM 
The 4+1 MS degree program is designed to allow outstanding 
undergraduate students the opportunity to earn both an 
undergraduate degree in various disciplines and a Master’s Degree 
in Criminalistics within a five year period. Students from any major 
may apply and should do so in their junior year. Working with both 
the undergraduate advisor and Criminalistics Program Director, the 
student will customize a schedule in which they will take graduate 
courses during their senior year. Students are able to complete up 
to 12 credits of graduate coursework as an undergraduate student. 
Students who successfully complete these courses may apply to 
continue into the MS in Criminalistics to complete the remaining 
credits. Applicants to the program must have a 3.0 undergraduate 
GPA. Retention in the program requires that the student maintain 
a minimum of a 3.0 GPA for their undergraduate studies.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GCRIM 501 Crime Scene Techniques 
3 credits
This is a course in the study of crime scene investigation. This 
course offers a comprehensive and engaging examination of 
criminal investigation and the vital role that criminal evidence 
plays in the process. This course focuses on the five critical areas 
essential to understanding criminal investigations: background and 
contextual issues, criminal evidence, legal procedures, evidence 
collection procedures, and forensic science. This course includes 
a multitude of case examples to illustrate key points and as a basis 
for discussion about the proper conduct of criminal investigations 
and goes beyond a simple how-to in investigative procedures, 
drawing from fascinating modern research and its importance in 
the real world of criminal justice.
GCRIM 507 Criminal Law of Evidence 
3 credits
Criminal Law provides students with an integrated framework for 
understanding the U.S. criminal justice system with a diverse and 
inclusive interdisciplinary approach and thematic focus. This course 
looks at the law and decisions in court cases and considers and 
integrates issues of race, gender, and socio-economic status with 
their discussion of criminal law. Material from the social sciences 
is incorporated to highlight the intersection between criminal law 
and key social issues. Case excerpts and detailed case summaries 
used to highlight important principles of criminal law are featured 
throughout the course. The coverage is conceptual and practical, 
showing students how the criminal law applies in a “real world” 
environment.
GCRIM 508 Courtroom Procedures 
3 credits
In this course, you will review ways in which the law, particularly 
the law of evidence, affects the work of law enforcement 
professionals. This course outlines the various roles of courtroom 
participants, paying particular attention to preparing individuals 
to become expert witnesses in the courtroom. This course works 
through the legal process up through trial, including appeals and 
motions for a new trial. Important legal doctrines such as chain of 
custody, work product privileges, laying the proper foundation, 
exhibits, and the standards necessary to obtain a new trial are also 
studied. This course will cover the various roles in the courtroom, 
trial preparation, preparing witnesses, and pointing out the 
differences between grand juries and trials.
GCRIM 509 Crime Mapping and Analysis 
3 credits
This course will provide students with the knowledge and use of GIS 
(Geographic Information System) in crime prevention and crime 
analysis. Students will learn through crime mapping exercises the 
various uses of GIS in a criminal investigation, prosecution, and 
correctional management. Students will develop crime-mapping 
projects using online data and will learn skills to make and analyze maps.
GCRIM 601 Criminalistics 
3 credits
In this course, you will learn many of the cardinal theories and 
techniques of forensic science, criminalistics and laboratory 
analysis. The necessity of a rigorous scientific approach will 
be stressed. The course is designed to acquaint the student with 
a comprehensive understanding of today’s crime laboratories 
and investigative techniques involving the proper collection, 
preservation, and analysis of evidence. The student will be 
introduced to scientific, technological, and experientially-based 
procedures as they are applied in the criminal justice system.
GCRIM 602 Psychology and Law 
3 credits
This course offers a definitive perspective on the practical 
application of psychological research to the law. Insight is offered 
into the application of psychology in criminal and non-criminal 
matters. Topics such as family law, insanity, police interrogation, 
jury selection and decision making, involuntary civil commitment, 
and various civil capacities are included. The course emphasizes 
the major contributions psychological research has made to the 
law and encourages critical analysis through examples of court 
cases, high-profile current events, and research leadership and the 
organizational improvement process.
69
Criminalistics
GCRIM 611 Digital Evidence 
3 credits
Computer and communication technologies have become key 
components to support critical infrastructure services in various 
sectors of our society. In an effort to share information and 
streamline operations, organizations are creating complex network 
systems and opening their networks to customers, suppliers, and 
other business partners. Increasing network complexity, greater 
access, and a growing emphasis on the Internet have made 
information and network security a major concern for organizations. 
This course focuses on computer and cyber forensics. Students will 
learn different aspects of computer and cybercrime and ways in 
which to uncover, protect, exploit, and document digital evidence. 
Students will be exposed to different types of tools (both software 
and hardware), techniques and procedure, and will be able to use 
them to perform rudimentary forensic investigations.
GCRIM 612 Interviewing and Dispute Resolution
3 credits
This course is working through the legal and practical aspects of 
interviewing and interrogation. The course offers perspectives from 
hands-on to legal considerations as well as ethics. Interrogation 
and interviewing are the cornerstones of any investigation and 
can make or break a case in court. It is imperative that one 
recognizes the legalities involved in the ethics of appropriate 
conduct and the proven methods and procedures for successful 
interviewing and interrogation. This course will utilize technologies 
such as Skype and Adobe Connect to allow students to practice 
interviewing techniques.
GCRIM 621 Physical and Pattern Evidence:  
Investigative Methods 
3 credits
In this course, you will learn various techniques utilized in data 
collection, information assessment, theory development, and 
evidence application as it relates to criminal investigations. The 
types of data associated with the three primary crime motivations 
will be studied with student recognition of data and the appropriate 
application of the information properly placed in relation to 
the identified motive. The course is designed to acquaint the 
student with a process involving investigative methodology and 
a comprehensive understanding of the most utilized investigative 
techniques in pursuit of the necessary evidence to successfully 
investigate and perfect today’s most serious crimes. The student 
will be introduced to scientific, technological, and experientially-
based procedures as they are applied in the criminal justice system.
GCRIM 622 Medicolegal Investigation 
3 credits 
This course provides an intensive look at medical and legal 
investigations. Topics include the difference between the medical 
(pathological) and legal (criminal) components of investigations 
into the manners and causes of death, medical and investigative 
terminology, the differences between a coroner and a medical 
examiner, and the impact of ethics on prosecutions and convictions. 
Case studies illustrate practical applications of various forms of 
forensic styles and parameters.
GCRIM 631 Applied Criminalistics 
3 credits 
This course complements prior courses by giving the student 
opportunities to investigate concepts and techniques learned 
during lectures previous instruction. The course focuses on the 
theories and practical applications regarding the identification and 
individualization of biological and physical evidence and uses a 
kit of multiple forensic experiments that students will do at home 
as part of their assessments.
GCRIM 641 Forensic Investigation Practicum 
3 credits 
This course examines the various forensic investigatory topics 
treated during the Criminalistics program, together with the 
expansion of a few topics not examined in detail during the 
program. The use of scientific methodology and ethical practices 
form the framework for intellectually examining the totality of a 
crime scene investigation. During the residency, mock crime scenes 
will be conducted to assess the knowledge, skills and abilities 
of students. Scenes may be indoor and/or outdoor. In addition, 
the forensic lab will be utilized to practice forensic techniques 
such as fingerprinting, blood detection, blood spatter, and casting 
impressions with dental stone.
70
Education
MISSION OF THE GRADUATE  
SCHOOL OF EDUCATION
The mission of the Graduate Department in the School of Education 
at Gannon University is to provide professional educators a 
practitioner-oriented instructional program that is steeped in 
academic excellence, visionary leadership, ethical practices, 
and collegiality.
Master of Education:  
Curriculum and Instruction – 
ONLINE
Program Director: Mr. Stephen F. Corsi 
Phone: (814) 871-5399  •  corsi008@gannon.edu
MISSION OF THE GANNON MASTER 
OF EDUCATION IN CURRICULUM  
AND INSTRUCTION PROGRAM
The Mission of the Gannon Master of Curriculum and Instruction 
program is to provide candidates exceptional professional education 
through integration of theory and pedagogy to prepare them to be 
Agents of Change within the disciplines of curriculum, instruction, 
and assessment. 
OVERVIEW
Gannon University offers the Master of Education in Curriculum 
and Instruction online. The Master’s degree is a 30-credit, non-
thesis program that is designed to facilitate the highest level of 
teacher performance. The core courses focus on the mastery of 
teacher effectiveness for teachers in grades PreK through 12. 
The program is designed to be convenient and flexible for teachers. 
Graduate learners complete two Gannon core courses (6 credits) 
each semester for three semesters. Courses are offered online in 
7-week sessions, and graduate learners may take more than one 
course at a time. Graduate learners complete the electives online 
whenever it is most convenient for them.
The program requires each candidate to complete 18 credits of 
core coursework, establish a concentration track, or complete 12 
credits of general elective coursework. The M.Ed. program offers 
the following concentration tracks:
•	 Leadership Concentration (16 credits): These courses are part 
of either the Principal Certification or District-Wide Supervisory 
Certificate in Curriculum and Instruction programs. Courses in 
the leadership concentration can be used towards completion 
of either certificate.
•	 ESL Program Specialist Certification (16 credits)
The Program Reflection is the capstone project in the M.Ed. in 
Curriculum and Instruction. After completing eight key assessments 
throughout the core courses, this final 4-6-page submission answers 
a series of targeted questions that require graduate learners to reflect 
upon their entire experience in the program.
TEACHERS AS AGENTS  
OF CHANGE – A RATIONALE
The Teacher as Agent of Change is the conceptual framework for 
the M.Ed. It is a unifying theme for all courses and is particularly 
applicable to the Program Reflection as well as the action research 
process. Considerable dialogue has taken place in recent years 
about the need for positive change in American education. The 
Gannon Master of Education enables the graduate learner to seize 
the opportunity to engage in a professional process of renewal. 
Graduate learners are empowered to translate their knowledge and 
skills into applied action research in the classroom.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Upon completion of the Master of Education: Curriculum and 
Instruction program, graduate learners are able to:
•	 Demonstrate advanced knowledge in the areas of curriculum, 
instruction, and assessment
•	 Engage in applied professional development and reflection
•	 Demonstrate the impact of change within a school environment
ADMISSIONS REQUIREMENTS
•	 A Bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited college or 
university and fulfillment of requirements for admission to the 
graduate program at Gannon University 
•	 Final, official transcripts from all colleges attended with a 
minimum cumulative grade point average of a 3.0 on a 4.0 scale; 
provisional acceptance may be granted in some instances
•	 A completed application for admission including three letters of 
recommendation from persons qualified to judge the applicant’s 
character and scholarly/professional abilities
•	 Evidence by previous academic record that the applicant has 
the general ability and preparation necessary to pursue graduate 
study successfully
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
Transfer of credits: 
Transferring credits to a program is done at the discretion of the 
program director. Minimum requirements are that they are graduate 
courses from an approved institution which have a grade of “B” or 
better and are recorded on an official transcript, and which are no 
older than five years at the time of submission for consideration. 
Generally, a maximum of six credits from an accredited university 
may be accepted. No credits may be transferred in place of the 
core courses.
71
Education
Core Courses (18 credits)
GEDU 505 	
Classroom Management 	
(3 credits)
GEDU 601 	
Action Research 	
(3 credits) 
GEDU 602 	
Program Reflection 	
(0 credits)
GEDU 604 	
Educational Tests and Measurements 	 (3 credits) 
GEDU 609 	
Inclusive Classroom Practices 	
(3 credits)
GEDU 612 	
Leadership, Current Issues,  
and the Teacher as Agent of Change 	
(3 credits) 
GEDU 621 	
School Curriculum 	
(3 credits)
	
	 	 	
Electives 	
(12 credits)
Advanced Certification Program Options:
Graduate learners can use the elective requirement to begin taking 
courses toward an advanced certification as a Reading Specialist 
(online courses plus practicums), ESL Program Specialist (online 
courses plus practicums), Principal Certification (online courses 
plus internships), or a District-Wide Supervisory Certificate (online 
courses plus internship). In addition, participants who wish to 
become secondary teachers in Biology, English, History/Social 
Studies, or Mathematics may use the elective requirement toward 
an initial certification.
Master of Education: Curriculum 
and Instruction – Secondary 
Teacher Certification
Program Coordinator: TBD
MISSION OF THE GANNON 
SECONDARY TEACHING PROGRAM
The Secondary programs promote excellence in content knowledge, 
intellectual skills, and dispositions by emphasizing extensive 
practical field experiences, professional development, research, 
and practices that support the developmental needs of students.
OVERVIEW
Students pursuing the Master of Education in Curriculum and 
Instruction can also seek preparation as a secondary education 
teacher certified in the content areas of Biology, English 
Mathematics, or Social Studies.
This program is designed for the professional who holds a bachelor’s 
degree and who seeks to obtain Pennsylvania Instructional I 
Teaching Certification in order to teach at the secondary level, 
grades 7-12.
In addition, individuals who wish to pursue teaching certification 
in grades 4-8 English Language Arts and Reading, Mathematics, 
Science, and/or Social Studies and who have earned a bachelor’s 
degree in a related field, may also be eligible for the program. 
All potential candidates are encouraged to request a transcript 
evaluation and to meet with the Program Coordinator to discuss 
requirements and scheduling options. Individuals who meet 
enrollment qualifications and who are currently employed as full-
time substitute teachers may be eligible to complete the program 
while continuing in their district position.
The program offers flexibility of scheduling and rolling admission 
options for summer, fall, and spring. Courses, except those that 
have a field experience component, are conveniently offered online 
to accommodate work and family schedules. Gannon University 
provides graduate learners with the tools to engage in leadership 
activities, instructional innovation, and ongoing assessment.
In each of the core courses, the graduate learner submits assignments 
that are labeled as Key Assessments. These assignments are 
reviewed by the course instructor. At the conclusion of the core 
courses, the graduate learner submits a final, electronic reflection 
which is reviewed by the Program Coordinator.
Individuals seeking initial teaching certification are also required 
to complete a professional portfolio. The professional portfolio is 
intended to demonstrate and document the professional educator’s 
knowledge, skills, abilities, performances, and professionalism. 
At the university level, portfolios must demonstrate the degree to 
which the teacher candidate has attained the outcomes designated 
by the School of Education and the Pennsylvania Department of 
Education. Equally important, the professional portfolio is a tool 
for the interviewing process.
Teacher candidates are required to complete more than 180 hours 
of field experiences and 14 weeks of student teaching. Student 
teaching is completed in an Erie area school district and requires 
the teacher candidate to be in an assigned classroom every day, 
all day for the full 14 weeks. Teacher candidates are encouraged 
to talk to their advisor early in the program so that they can take 
the proper course sequence and meet all certification and program 
requirements.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
In addition to the learning outcomes in the Master of Education: 
Curriculum and Instruction program, graduate learners who are 
seeking initial teaching certification are able to:
•	 Demonstrate knowledge of research-based educational belief 
systems and pedagogical/subject-matter content
•	 Demonstrate a culture of learning
•	 Assess and analyze student learning and make appropriate 
adjustments to instruction, including differentiation for diverse 
and exceptional learners and monitoring student progress
•	 Establish and reflect on ongoing professional relationships 
with colleagues, students, parents, school districts, and the 
community to enhance student learning
72
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS – 
MASTER’S DEGREE 
•	 A Bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited college or 
university and fulfillment of requirements for admission to the 
graduate program at Gannon University
•	 Final, official transcripts from all colleges attended with a 
minimum cumulative grade point average of 3.0 on a 4.0 scale; 
provisional acceptance may be granted to individuals with a 
GPA of 2.8.
•	 A completed application for admission including three letters 
of recommendation
•	 Evidence by previous academic record that the applicant has 
the general ability and preparation necessary to pursue graduate 
study successfully
•	 An interview with the Program Director
Before admission to the graduate program, student transcripts will 
be reviewed by a faculty member in the content area of intended 
certification as well as by the Program Coordinator in the School 
of Education to determine the required program of study.
When individuals who have earned a bachelor’s degree in Biology, 
English, Mathematics, Social Studies, or related field and have 
passed the appropriate licensure exam, additional coursework in 
the content area may not be required.
Individuals must also apply and be admitted to the School of 
Education to be eligible for field experiences and upper-level 
education courses. Admission to the M.Ed. program for the purpose 
of pursuing teacher certification does not guarantee admission to 
the School of Education. Once admitted to the School of Education, 
the teacher candidate must complete all certification requirements 
as outlined in the Teacher Certification Handbook.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS – 
TEACHER CERTIFICATION
The candidate will provide the following official documentation 
that demonstrates:
•	 A B.A. or B.S. degree in the content area or related content area 
for which the applicant is seeking a PA Instructional I certificate
•	 An overall GPA of 3.0; Provisional acceptance may be granted 
for a GPA between 2.8 and 2.99
•	 All required courses in the candidate’s content area of Biology, 
English, Mathematics, or Social Studies have been successfully 
completed with a grade of “C” or better
•	 Valid negative TB test on file in the School of Education
•	 Valid clearances, including Criminal Background Check, 
Child Abuse Clearance, and FBI Fingerprint Check have been 
obtained. In addition, Act 126 training and the Diocesan Child 
Protection Policy Inservice must be completed. To be considered 
valid, the applicant must submit original documents which are 
less than one year old. For student teaching, clearances must be 
less than one year old at the conclusion of the experience. Please 
note that the fingerprint check must be obtained by following 
the procedures set forth by the Pennsylvania Department of 
Education
•	 A completed application to the School of Education which 
includes a writing sample has been submitted
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
This program requires the student to take 24 credits of core 
courses, 6 credits of cognate courses, and 18 credits of certification 
requirements.
REQUIRED CORE COURSES
The following courses are completed online.
GEDU 505	
Classroom Management 	
(3 credits)
GEDU 601	
Action Research 	
(3 credits)
GEDU 602	
Program Reflection 	
(0 credits)
GEDU 604	
Educational Tests and Measurements 	 (3 credits)
GEDU 609	
Inclusive Classroom Practices 	
(3 credits) 
GEDU 612 	
Leadership, Current Issues,  
and the Teacher as Agent of Change 	
(3 credits) 
GEDU 621 	
School Curriculum 	
(3 credits)
GEDU 623	
Technology Literacy and Integration 	
(3 credits) 
GEDU 637 	
Learning Theory 	
(3 credits)
REQUIRED COGNATE COURSES 
The following credits are completed online.
GEDU 537	
Special Education Overview 	
(3 credits)
GEDU 627	
Foundations of Literacy 
	
	 	 	
in the Secondary Program 	
(3 credits) 
This course sequence completes the requirements for the M.Ed.
Total credits for M.Ed. Curriculum and Instruction: 30
CERTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS 
(16 or 17 credits)
The following additional courses and field experiences are required 
for teacher certification. The courses and field experiences should 
be taken in the following order:
GEDU 516	
Instructional Design and the 
	
	 	 	
Classroom Management 	
(3 credits) 
GEDU 628	
Secondary Education 
	
	 	 	
Field Experience I	
(0 credits)
GEDU 521	
Methods and Materials of Instruction 
	
	 	 	
Seminar 	
(1 credit)
GEDU 629	
Secondary Education 
	
	 	 	
Field Experience II 	
(0 credits)
GEDU 520	
Methods and Materials for Teaching English 
Language Learners (ELLs)/Field Experience. 15 
hrs. (3 credits). This course is offered either as 
an online or face-to-face course. Individuals who 
wish to add ESL specialist certification to their 
credentials must also enroll in GEDU 525 ESL 
Field Experience 	
(1 credit)
73
Education
GEDU 632	
Secondary Education Field 
	
	 	 	
Experience III 	
(0 credits)
GEDU 550	
Student Teaching 	
(6 credits)
GEDU 690	
Professional Seminar (taken in conjunction with 
GEDU 550 Student Teaching) 	
(3 credits)
Total minimum credits required for MEd with teacher 
certification: 46 or 47 credits
STEPS TO CERTIFICATION
1.	 Successfully complete all required coursework and field 
experiences.
2.	 Pass required licensure (Praxis) exam.
3.	 Apply for certification on the PA Teacher Information 
Management System (TIMS). Note: A GPA of 3.0 is required 
for teacher certification.
4.	 Gannon University recommends candidates for certification, 
and PDE approves and issues certification.
Master of Education:  
Reading and Reading Specialist 
Certification Program – ONLINE
Program Director: Dr. Lisa A. Brown 
Phone: 814-871-5534  •  brown552@gannon.edu
MISSION STATEMENT  
OF THE READING AND  
READING SPECIALIST PROGRAM
The mission of the Master of Education in Reading/Reading 
Specialist Program at Gannon University is to prepare Reading 
professionals who have the skills and knowledge in literacy 
instruction, diagnostic analysis and assessment to ensure that all 
students have the opportunities and resources to develop the literacy 
skills they need to reach their full potential.
OVERVIEW
Preparation in Reading is a valuable area of specialization The 
Master of Education in Reading provides a strong foundation in 
the pedagogical, curricular, and leadership dimensions of reading 
instruction required for key positions in literacy programs.
The MEd in Reading provides training to become a reading profes-
sional who can function collaboratively and in a variety of capaci-
ties. Preparation consists of theory, application, and implementation 
of research-based instruction and assessment practices. Candidates 
who complete the Master of Education in Reading are eligible to 
apply for Reading Specialist Certification in Pennsylvania upon 
successful completion of the degree requirements and passing the 
Reading Specialist Praxis Exam. The Reading Specialist is trained 
in instruction and assessment techniques and given leadership op-
portunities to support and advance literacy programs for students, 
parents, other educators, and the community.
Those who already hold a master’s degree in education can add 
the Reading Specialist Certification by completing the required 27 
credits and passing the Reading Specialist Praxis Exam.
During a specified time in the summer, all candidates must 
complete 42 hours of clinical as part pf GEDU 639 (Reading 
Clinic) The summer clinical experience is completed at an 
approved site under the supervision of a site-based reading 
specialist and a university faculty supervisor.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Upon completion of the Master of Education: Reading/Reading 
Specialist program, graduate learners are able to:
•	 Demonstrate skills to administer appropriate literacy assessments 
and to analyze the results to determine instructional needs
•	 Develop and implement coherent, inclusive lessons for all 
students in need of specialized literacy instruction
•	 Collaborate with colleagues to select and use appropriate literacy 
resources
•	 Create a respectful and culturally responsive classroom for 
teaching, learning, and communication
•	 Establish active communication with students, school personnel, 
and parents to enhance student learning
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
•	 A completed application for admission including three letters of 
recommendation from persons qualified to judge the applicant’s 
scholarly/professional abilities and character
•	 Candidates must submit an official transcript showing 
completion of a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited 
college or university
•	 A graduate minimum cumulative grade point average of a 3.0 
GPA on a 4.0 scale
•	 Evidence by previous academic record that the applicant has 
the general ability and preparation necessary to pursue graduate 
study successfully
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
Transfer of credits: 
Transferring credits to a program is done at the discretion of the 
program director . Minimum requirements are that they are graduate 
courses from an approved institution which have a grade of “B” or 
better and are recorded on an official transcript, and which are no 
older than five years at the time of submission for consideration. 
Generally, a maximum of six credits may be transferred in place 
of the core courses.
Candidates must successfully pass the Reading Specialist K-12 
Praxis Exam to be eligible for certification.
74
Requirements for Reading Specialist Certification  
(21 credits total)
GEDU 626	
Foundations of Literacy	
(3 credits)
GEDU 627	
Content Literacy 	
(3 credits)
GEDU 634	
Literacy Leadership	
(3 credits) 
GEDU 638	
Word Knowledge	
(3 credits)
GEDU 639	
Reading Clinic	
(3 credits)
GEDU 642	
Writing Essentials	
(3 credits)
GEDU 646	
Assessment and Application	
(3 credits) 
	
	 	 During a specified time in the summer, all candidates must 
complete 42 hours of clinical experience as part of GEDU 
639 (Reading Clinic). . The summer clinical experience 
is completed at an approved site under the supervision 
of a site-based reading specialist and a university faculty 
supervisor.
Additional Requirements for the  
Master of Education in Reading
(30 credits total)
GEDU 520	
Methods and Materials for Teaching  
English Language Learners	
(3 credits)
GEDU 644	
Student-Centered Action Research	
(3 credits)
GEDU 601	
Action Research	
(3 credits)
STEPS TO CERTIFICATION
1.	 Successfully complete all required coursework.
2.	 Pass required Praxis exam.
3.	 Apply for certification on the PA Teacher Information 
Management System (TIMS).
4.	 Gannon University recommends candidates for certification, 
and PDE approves and issues certification.
English as a Second Language 
PreK-12 Program Specialist 
Certificate – ONLINE
Program Director: TBD
MISSION STATEMENT OF THE 
ENGLISH AS A SECOND LANGUAGE 
PROGRAM
The mission of the English as a Second Language Program at 
Gannon University is to prepare teachers with the knowledge of 
second language acquisition and cultural competencies necessary 
to provide standards-based instruction and assessment for English 
Language Learners (ELLs) so that they may acquire the level of 
English proficiency needed to be successful in society.
OVERVIEW
The English as a Second Language Program Specialist Certificate 
is designed to prepare candidates to become leaders in second 
language acquisition. Candidates are prepared to support students 
and other teachers using their expert knowledge and skills gained 
through coursework and a total of 60 field experience hours. Those 
who complete the program gain an understanding and appreciation 
of various cultures as well as acquire a solid foundation in the 
theories and current research in second language acquisition. 
Coursework is delivered in an online format. Each course has a 
corresponding 15-hour 1-credit field experience which must be 
completed in the field. At least one placement must be in a PreK-
12 classroom setting.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Upon completion of the English as a Second Language (ESL) 
Specialist program, graduate learners are able to:
•	 Develop and implement coherent, inclusive lessons that meet 
the academic and social needs of ELLs
•	 Utilize effective assessments that meet the academic and social 
needs of ELLs
•	 Collaborate with colleagues to select and use appropriate 
resources
•	 Create a respectful and culturally responsive classroom for 
teaching, learning, and communication
•	 Establish active communication with students, school personnel, 
and parents to enhance student learning
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS 
•	 A completed application for admission including three letters of 
recommendation from persons qualified to judge the applicant’s 
scholarly/professional abilities and character.
•	 A Bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited college or 
university with a cumulative grade point average of at least 3.0 
on a 4.0 scale.
•	 A valid Pennsylvania Instructional I or II teaching certificate. 
Those applicants holding a teaching certification from another 
state should contact their issuing state Department of Education 
to determine eligibility and requirements for ESL certification 
in that state.
•	 International students must provide evidence of proficiency 
in English as indicated by a rating of superior on the Oral 
Proficiency Interview English Language Testing (OPI).
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
Transfer of credits: 
Transferring credits to a program is done at the discretion of the 
program director. Minimum requirements are that they are graduate 
courses from an approved institution which have a grade of “B” or 
better and are recorded on an official transcript, and which are no 
older than five years at the time of submission for consideration.
75
Education
This program requires the student to take 16 credits focused on 
preparation for the ESL Program Specialist Certificate. Field 
experiences should be completed in the same semester as the 
courses with which they are paired.
GEDU 518 	
Educational Approaches in a  
Multicultural Society 	
(3 credits) 
GEDU 523	
Educational Approaches in a  
Multicultural Society Field Experience  
15 hours 	
(1 credit)
GEDU 520	
Methods and Materials for Teaching  
English Language Learners 	
(3 credits)
GEDU 525	
Methods and Materials for Teaching  
English Language Learners  
Field Experience 15 hours 	
(1 credit)
GEDU 519 	
Structures of English (3 credits)
GEDU 524	
Structures of English Field Experience  
15 hours 	
(1 credit)
GEDU 517	
Assessment and Support for  
English Language Learners 	
(3 credits)
GEDU 522	
Assessment and Support for English  
Language Learners Field Experience  
15 hours 	
(1 credit)
Total credits required for ESL Certificate	
16 credits
Principal PK-12 Certification 
Program – ONLINE
Program Director: Mr. Stephen F. Corsi
(814) 871-5399 • corsi008@gannon.edu
MISSION STATEMENT  
OF THE PRINCIPAL PK-12 
CERTIFICATION PROGRAM
The mission of Gannon University’s Principal Preparation Program 
is to prepare principals as instructional leaders who effectively and 
ethically bring about continuous school improvements that result 
in increased student achievement.
PRINCIPAL AS AGENT  
OF SCHOOL REFORM
The Principal Preparation Program is designed around the 
conceptual framework of The Principal as Agent of School Reform 
and is designed to meet the Pennsylvania Leadership Standards. 
All the courses in the certification program are approved to meet 
the Act 48 professional development requirement.
PROGRAM DISTINCTIONS
Program Delivery Model for Working Professionals
Classes meet online. The 12-month online program allows the 
complete flexibility that busy educators need to accommodate 
work and family. Travel to Gannon University is not required 
during the program. 
Leadership Assessment
Each candidate takes part in a leadership assessment prior to the 
capstone internship experience. This assessment helps to establish 
the focus of the internship and ensures that the candidate has a well-
rounded experience under the direction of a principal.
Cohort
The design of Gannon’s program is based on effective models of 
adult learning. The program provides candidates in an online cohort 
community the opportunity to cooperate and collaborate throughout 
the sequence of five connected core courses, four of which have 
job concurrent internships. Once the online learning community 
is formed, it becomes the basis of a strong professional network 
that continues to provide support and professional development 
for the candidates as they move through their leadership careers.
Program Advisor
Every candidate is assigned a Program Advisor who serves as the 
consistent point of contact and mentor throughout the candidate’s 
program.
Highly Qualified Faculty
Courses are taught by highly qualified content experts who are 
successful practitioners in their respective fields. These faculty 
members are either current principals or individuals who have 
administrative experience.
Concurrent Internships
The internships begin during the first course at the introductory 
level, continue through key skills areas at the developmental level, 
and culminate during the last course in a mastery level capstone 
internship. This concurrent model allows candidates to have 
guided practice and formative feedback from faculty mentors and 
experienced practitioners while they are enrolled in a course that 
is associated with the internship.
Length of Internships
The internship experiences take place throughout the program so 
that candidates are involved in critical leadership responsibilities 
involving students, faculty and staff, strategic planning, curriculum 
development, budgeting, and other key areas of district culture. The 
internships vary in length from 20 to 35 hours and the Principal 
Mastery Internship is 235 hours, which equates to 360 total 
internship hours in the PreK-12 Principal Certification program.
76
Principal Professional Portfolio
Candidates develop a Principal Professional Portfolio throughout 
their courses and internship learning experiences and present the 
portfolio as a capstone activity. The portfolio is a very effective 
tool in career advancement.
Core courses and portfolio (21 credits over three semesters) 
August–October
3 credits		
GEDU 720 Quality Teaching, Continuous 
Improvement, and Professional Accountability
1 credit	 	
GEDU 725 Principal Introductory Internship 
(35 hours)
October–December
3 credits		
GEDU 722 School Financial Management
1 credit	 	
GEDU 726 School Financial Management 
Developmental Internship (35 hours)
January–March
2 credits		
GEDU 730 Diverse Learner Competencies 
for School Leaders
1 credit	 	
GEDU 731 Diverse Learner Competencies 
for School Leaders Developmental Internship 
(35 hours)
3 credits		
GEDU 721 Principal as Agent of School Reform
May–August
2 credits		
GEDU 723 Legal Aspects of Educational 
Administration
1 credit	 	
Legal Aspects of Educational Administration 
Developmental Internship (20 hours)
3 credits		
GEDU 728 Principal Mastery Internship (235 hours)
1 credit	 	
GEDU 732 Principal Professional Portfolio
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Upon completion of the advanced certification Principal program, 
candidates will be able to:
•	 Demonstrate knowledge of instructional, strategic, and 
operational leadership
•	 Design and lead staff in professional development
•	 Evaluate data to inform decision making
•	 Demonstrate the impact of change within a school environment
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Applicants must:
•	 Complete an application for admission.
•	 Submit an official transcript from a regionally accredited college 
or university which verify a master’s degree in Education or a 
related field and a minimum cumulative GPA of 3.0 on a 4.0 
scale, plus transcripts showing any additional graduate-level 
coursework.
•	 Submit three letters of recommendation, including one from 
the current superintendent and one from the current building 
principal. The letters from the superintendent and principal must 
speak to the candidate’s potential to become an effective school 
leader and acknowledge permission for the candidate to engage 
in internship activities throughout the year. 
•	 Submit documentation of three years of educational experience 
working under a certificate. Candidates may be admitted with 
two years of experience if they will have completed three years 
of experience by the time their program concludes.
Transfer of credits: 
Transferring credits to a program is done at the discretion of the 
program director. Minimum requirements are that they are graduate 
courses from an approved institution which have a grade of “B” or 
better and are recorded on an official transcript, and which are no 
older than five years at the time of submission for consideration. 
Generally, a maximum of six credits from an accredited university 
may be accepted. Candidates holding a District-Wide Supervisory 
Certificate in Curriculum and Instruction and enrolling in the 
Principal Certification program can earn the certification in 13 
credits, pending a transcript review.
1.	 This online program requires the candidate to take 21 credits 
based upon a transcript review. 
2.	 Candidates must have completed required courses, have three 
years of professional school experience in an instructional area, 
and attained a minimum GPA of 3.0 to be recommended for 
certification by Gannon University.
3.	 Candidates are required to successfully complete a 235-hour 
Mastery Internship to be eligible for certification.
STEPS TO CERTIFICATION
1.	 Successfully complete all required coursework.
2.	 Pass required Praxis exam.
3.	 Apply for certification on the PA Teacher Information 
Management System (TIMS).
4.	 Gannon University recommends candidates for certification, 
and PDE approves and issues certification.
RECOMMENDATION
Candidates enrolled in the Principal PK-12 program should consider 
adding the Supervisor of Curriculum and Instruction certification to 
their credentials once they have completed the principal program. 
The supervisory certification is a value-added component to one’s 
principal certification.
ALTERNATE ROUTE TO PRINCIPAL CERTIFICATION 
(Provisional Administrative Level I Certification)
Under certain conditions, candidates who hold a bachelor’s degree 
may attain principal certification though an alternative route. 
Three years of documented relevant professional experience in 
an educational setting and a certified offer of employment as 
a principal, vice principal, or assistant principal are required, 
along with additional coursework completed within two years of 
employment as a principal, vice principal or assistant principal. For 
more details, please contact the program director.
77
Education
District-Wide Supervisory 
Certificate: Curriculum  
and Instruction – ONLINE
Program Director: Mr. Stephen F. Corsi
(814) 871-5399  •  corsi008@gannon.edu
MISSION STATEMENT  
OF THE DISTRICT-WIDE 
SUPERVISORY CERTIFICATE: 
CURRICULUM AND INSTRUCTION
The mission of Gannon University’s District-Wide Supervisory 
Certification in Curriculum and Instruction program is to prepare 
school administrators for the role of a district-wide specialist 
who works across the total grade organization and is responsible 
for supervising instruction and evaluating staff, designing and 
developing curriculum and innovative educational programs, 
conducting experimental instructional initiatives, and directing 
and conducting applied educational research.
OVERVIEW
The Curriculum and Instruction Supervisor is a district-wide 
specialist who works across all grade levels of a school entity. 
Candidates who successfully complete the principal certification 
program at Gannon University may elect to take an additional 
9 credits of coursework to be eligible to apply for certification 
as a Curriculum and Instruction Supervisor. Candidates who 
have completed their principal certification program at another 
institution may need 9-17 credits based upon a transcript review. In 
addition, candidates must have an Instructional II Pennsylvania 
teaching certificate. Candidates must also take and pass a 
Praxis examination prior to receiving their certification from the 
Pennsylvania Department of Education.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Upon completion of the District-Wide Supervisory Certification 
in Curriculum and Instruction program, candidates will be able to:
•	 Demonstrate knowledge of instructional, strategic, and opera-
tional leadership
•	 Design and lead staff in professional development
•	 Evaluate data to inform decision making
•	 Demonstrate the impact of change within a school environment
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
Transfer of credits: 
Transferring credits to a program is done at the discretion of the 
program director. Minimum requirements are that they are graduate 
courses from an approved institution which have a grade of “B” or 
better and are recorded on an official transcript, and which are no 
older than five years at the time of submission for consideration. 
Generally, a maximum of six credits from an accredited university 
may be accepted. Candidates holding a Principal Certificate and 
enrolling in the District-Wide Supervisory Certificate in Curriculum 
and Instruction program can earn the certification in nine credits, 
pending a transcript review.
For individuals who have successfully completed Gannon’s 
Principal PreK-12 certification program, the nine credits 
listed below are required. A transcript review is required for 
all other candidates. 
GEDU 616 School and Community Relations (3 credits online), 
GEDU 617 Administration of School Personnel (3 credits 
online), and GEDU 713 Supervisory Mastery Internship (3 
credits/360 hours)
1.	 This online program requires the candidate to take 9-17 credits 
based upon a transcript review, including evidence of prior 
course work in curriculum and assessment. Individuals who do 
not provide evidence of prior course work in curriculum and 
assessment are required to write a narrative based upon their 
professional and personal experiences in the areas of curriculum 
and assessment. A course waiver will be completed.
2.	 Candidates must have completed required courses, have five 
years of professional school experience in an instructional area, 
and attained a minimum GPA of 3.0 to be recommended for 
certification by Gannon University.
3.	 Candidates are required to successfully complete a 360-hour 
Mastery Internship to be eligible for certification.
STEPS TO CERTIFICATION
1.	 Successfully complete all required coursework.
2.	 Pass required Praxis exam.
3.	 Apply for certification on the PA Teacher Information 
Management System (TIMS).
4.	 Gannon University recommends candidates for certification, 
and PDE approves and issues certification.
Superintendent Certification/
Letter of Eligibility Program – 
ONLINE
Program Director: Mr. Stephen F. Corsi
(814) 871-5399  •  corsi008@gannon.edu
MISSION STATEMENT OF THE 
SUPERINTENDENT CERTIFICATION/
LETTER OF ELIGIBILITY PROGRAM
The mission of Gannon University’s Superintendent Preparation 
Program is to prepare superintendents to be strategic system leaders 
who effectively and ethically bring about continuous system 
improvements that result in increased student achievement. 
78
SUPERINTENDENT AS  
STRATEGIC SYSTEM LEADER
The Superintendent Letter of Eligibility Program is designed around 
the conceptual framework of The Superintendent as Strategic 
System Leader and is designed to meet the Pennsylvania Leadership 
Standards.
All courses in the certification program are approved to meet 
the Act 45 professional development requirement for practicing 
administrators.
PROGRAM DISTINCTIONS
Program Delivery Model for Working Professionals
Classes meet online. The 12-month online program allows for the 
complete flexibility required for busy educators to accommodate 
work and family. Travel to Gannon University is not required 
during the program.
Leadership Assessment
Candidates take part in a leadership assessment prior to the capstone 
internship experience. This assessment helps to establish the focus 
of the internship and ensures that the candidate has a well-rounded 
experience.
Cohort
The design of Gannon’s program is based on effective models of 
adult learning. The program provides candidates in an online cohort 
community the opportunity to cooperate and collaborate throughout 
the sequence of five connected core courses, four of which have 
job concurrent internships. The online learning community formed 
becomes the basis of a strong professional network that continuous 
to provide support and professional development for the candidates 
as they move through their leadership careers.
Program Advisor
Every candidate has a Program Advisor who serves as the consistent 
point of contact and mentor throughout the candidate’s program.
Highly Qualified Faculty
Courses are taught by highly qualified content experts who are 
successful practitioners in their respective fields. These faculty 
members are either current superintendents or individuals who 
have relevant central office experience.
Concurrent Internships
The internships begin during the first course at the introductory 
level, continue through key skills areas at the developmental level 
and culminate during the last course in a mastery level capstone 
internship. This concurrent model allows candidates to have guided 
practice and formative feedback from university faculty mentors 
and experienced practitioners while they are enrolled in a course 
that is associated with the internship.
Length of Internships
The internship experiences take place throughout the program so 
that candidates are involved in critical leadership responsibilities 
involving students, faculty and staff, strategic planning, curriculum 
development, budgeting, and other key areas of district culture 
related to a superintendent’s position. The internships vary in length 
from 20 to 35 hours and the Superintendent Mastery Internship 
is 235 hours, which equates to 360 total internship hours in the 
Superintendent Letter of Eligibility program.
Superintendent Professional Portfolio
Candidates develop a Superintendent Professional Portfolio 
throughout their courses and internship learning experiences and 
present the portfolio as a capstone activity. The portfolio is a very 
effective tool in career advancement.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Upon completion of the Superintendent Letter of Eligibility 
Certification program, candidates are able to:
•	 Demonstrate knowledge of instructional, strategic, and 
operational leadership
•	 Design and lead staff in professional development
•	 Evaluate data to inform decision making
•	 Demonstrate the impact of change within a school environment
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Applicants must:
•	 Complete an application for admission.
•	 Submit an official transcript from a regionally accredited college 
or university which verify a master’s degree in Education or a 
related field and a minimum cumulative GPA of 3.0 on a 4.0 
scale, plus transcripts showing any additional graduate-level 
coursework.
•	 Submit three letters of recommendation, including one from the 
current superintendent. The letter from the superintendent must 
speak to the candidate’s potential to become an effective system 
leader and acknowledge permission for the candidate to engage 
in internship activities throughout the year.
•	 Submit evidence of six years of satisfactory school experience 
of which at least three must be in a supervisory or administrative 
capacity. 
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
Transfer of credits: 
Transferring credits to a program is done at the discretion of the 
program director. Minimum requirements are that they are graduate 
courses from an approved institution which have a grade of “B” or 
better and are recorded on an official transcript, and which are no 
older than five years at the time of submission for consideration. 
Generally, a maximum of six credits from an accredited university 
may be accepted.
79
Education
Courses and portfolio (21-23 credits over three semesters)
August–October
3 credits 	
GEDU 740 Superintendent as Architect of  
Standards-based Reform
1 credit	 	
GEDU 748 Superintendent Introductory Internship  
(35 hours)
October–December
3 credits		
GEDU 744 Business Administration and Finance  
in Public Education 
1 credit	 	
GEDU 747 Business Administration and Finance in 
Public Education Developmental Internship 
(35 hours)
January–March
2 credits		
GEDU 743 Collective Bargaining and 
Labor Relations
1 credit	 	
GEDU 746 Collective Bargaining and Labor 
Relations Developmental Internship (35 hours)
2 credits		
GEDU 730 Diverse Learner Competencies for 
School Leaders (based on transcript review)
March–May
3 credits		
GEDU 741 Superintendent as Strategic 
System Leader
May–August	
2 credits		
GEDU 742 Educational Facilities and School Plant
1 credit	 	
GEDU 745 Educational Facilities and School Plant 
Developmental Internship (20 hours)
3 credits		
GEDU 750 Superintendent Mastery Internship  
(235 hours)
1 credit	 	
GEDU 751 Superintendent Professional Portfolio
1.	 This online program requires the candidate to take 21-23 
credits based upon a transcript review, including evidence of 
prior course work in diverse learning. Individuals who do not 
provide evidence of prior course work in diverse learning are 
required to write a narrative based upon their professional and 
personal experiences in diverse learning. A course waiver will 
be completed.
2.	 Candidates must have completed required courses, have six 
years of school experience, of which at least three must be in a 
supervisory or administrative capacity, and attain a minimum 
GPA of 3.0 to be recommended for certification by Gannon 
University.
3.	 Candidates are required to successfully complete a 235-hour 
Mastery Internship to be eligible for certification.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Upon completion of the Superintendent Letter of Eligibility 
Certification program, candidates are able to:
•	 Demonstrate knowledge of instructional, strategic, and 
operational leadership
•	 Design and lead staff in professional development
•	 Evaluate date to inform decision making
•	 Demonstrate the impact of change within a school environment
STEPS TO CERTIFICATION
1.	 Successfully complete all required coursework.
2.	 Pass required Praxis exam.
3.	 Apply for certification on the PA Teacher Information Manage-
ment System (TIMS).
4.	 Gannon University recommends candidates for certification, 
and PDE approves and issues certification.
ALTERNATIVE ROUTE TO SUPERINTENDENT PK-12 
CERTIFICATION (Commission Qualification Letter Process)
In certain circumstances, a Commission Qualification Letter (CQL) 
may be issued to an applicant who holds a graduate degree from 
an accredited higher education institution in business, finance, 
or management, and provides evidence of four years of relevant 
business, finance, or management work experience in the fields 
of business, industry, or education. The CQL is not a credential. 
It is a letter that confirms that the candidate met alternative route 
requirements to be commissioned as a superintendent or assistant 
superintendent in Pennsylvania. The CQL requires, among other 
things, completion of a Leadership Development Program that 
meets the Pennsylvania School Leadership Standards under Section 
1217 during the initial contract term as a superintendent or assistant 
superintendent in Pennsylvania. For more information, please 
contact the program director.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GEDU 505 Classroom Management
3 credits
This course is a study of major educational disciplines, theory, 
and practical application for teachers as they use their knowledge 
and skills for effective classroom management. Graduate learners 
discover how to deal with disrespect, defiance, disruption, bullying, 
violence, and many other problems they must handle.
GEDU 512 Autism Spectrum Disorders: Theory and Practice
3 credits
This course is an introduction to the education and habilitation 
of children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The 
course concentrates on historical development, identification, 
assessment, and characteristics, including communication and 
social skills, of ASD. Instructional interventions are also identified 
and examined. The course is a competency-based course which will 
be delivered in a seven-week online modality.
GEDU 513 Autism Spectrum Disorders: Field Experience 1
1 credit
This course is a field experience taken concurrently or upon 
completion of GEDU 512 Autism Spectrum Disorders: Theory and 
Practice. The experiential learning takes place in an educational or 
therapeutic setting for 30 hours. The candidate observes, serves as a 
teacher aide, and begins to practice skills. Online communications 
are required during this course.
80
Please note: For individuals who live in the Erie area, arrangements 
for the practicum will be done by the School of Education. For 
individuals who live outside of the Erie area, special arrangements 
will need to be made. The individual must contact the Program 
Coordinator prior to enrolling in GEDU 513 to discuss the 
practicum site arrangements.
GEDU 516 Instructional Design and Classroom Management
3 credits
This course introduces teacher candidates to creating and managing 
instruction in the learning environment. Candidates develop 
standards-based lessons demonstrating connections among 
curriculum, instruction, and assessment that result in successful 
learning. As candidates develop an understanding of the scope 
and sequence of instructional planning, emphasis is placed on 
application of learning theories, research-based instructional 
practices, and effective feedback strategies. Candidates examine 
approaches for differentiated instruction to meet student needs. 
In addition, teacher candidates develop effective techniques and 
strategies for classroom organization and management, ensuring a 
safe, valued, and respectful environment for all learners. Effective 
interactions with instructional support staff, paraprofessionals, 
and parents are discussed throughout the course. The 60-hour 
field experience associated with this course is an Observation and 
Exploration (Stages 1 and 2) experience that takes place throughout 
the semester. 
GEDU 517 Assessment and Support  
for English Language Learners (ELLs)
3 credits
This seven-week online course is designed to expand graduate 
learners’ knowledge of effective assessment practice and support 
services available for ELLs. Graduate learners explore purposes and 
uses of assessment, assessment models, assessment scaffolding, and 
formal/informal assessment tools. The availability of school support 
services to assist ELLs in language acquisition and content learning 
and ways to promote parental/family involvement with their 
children’s educational program are examined. Graduate learners 
gain hands-on experience in test administration, interpretation, 
and reporting. Also, Individualized Education Plans for ELLs 
identified as special education candidates are reviewed. Graduate 
learners in this course who are pursuing ESL certification must 
also register for GEDU522. Those who are not pursuing ESL 
certification are not required to register for GEDU 522.
GEDU 518 Educational Approaches in a Multicultural Society
3 credits
This course explores critical multiculturalism, the ways in which 
schooling intersects with cultural identities, and how educators can 
be advocates for social justice. Graduate learners examine cross-
cultural communication and the relationship between language 
and culture in educational contexts. Graduate learners in this 
course who are pursuing ESL certification must also register 
for GEDU 523. Those who are not pursuing ESL certification 
are not required to register for GEDU 523.
GEDU 519 Structures of English 
3 credits
This seven-week online course examines (American) English usage, 
fundamentals of linguistics, literacy development, and current 
theories in first and second language acquisition. Knowledge of 
English components (i.e., morphology, syntax, phonology) and 
understanding of the human context is essential for teachers. 
Graduate learners in this course who are pursuing ESL 
certification must also register for GEDU 524. Those who are 
not pursuing ESL certification are not required to register for 
GEDU 524.
GEDU 520 Methods and Materials for  
Teaching English Language Learners (ELL) 
3 credits
This course provides graduate learners with a survey of current 
research and theory in English as a Second Language (ESL) and 
teaching English Language Learners (ELLs). Fifteen hours of field 
experience are embedded throughout the course, providing learners 
with an opportunity to observe in an ESL setting. The course is 
offered in both face-to-face and online modalities. Graduate 
learners in this course who are pursuing ESL certification 
must also register for GEDU 525. Those who are not pursuing 
ESL certification are not required to register for GEDU 525.
GEDU 521 Methods and Materials of Instruction Seminar
1 credit
This course is designed for middle level, secondary, and special 
education PreK-12 majors. It emphasizes teaching methodologies, 
standards-based instruction, and integration of content areas. 
Candidates prepare effective lessons in specific content areas 
and select instructional methods and materials appropriate for 
adolescents. To provide an opportunity for candidates to work 
with a content expert in their field, a 60-hour Pre-student Teaching 
(Stage 3) field experience for 7-12 majors and 15 hours for all other 
Education programs accompany the course.
GEDU 522 Assessment and Support for English Language 
Learners Field Experience
1 credit
This course is taken concurrently with GEDU 517 only by 
those pursuing ESL certification. The field experience is a 15-
hour course that allows for the application of skills and knowledge 
learned in GEDU 517. During the field experience, graduate 
learners observe effective assessment practices and participate in 
implementing an assessment of an ELL.
GEDU 523 Educational Approaches in a  
Multicultural Society Field Experience
1 credit
This 15-hour course is taken concurrently with GEDU 518 only 
by those pursuing ESL certification. During the field experience, 
graduate learners conduct a cultural assessment through observation 
and interaction with a group of ELL students and put into practice 
the concepts and skills learned in GEDU 518.
81
Education
GEDU 524 Structures of English Field Experience
1 credit
This 15-hour course is taken concurrently with GEDU 519 
only by those pursuing ESL certification. During the field 
experience, graduate learners observe an ELL, apply those insights 
and knowledge to a classroom setting, and put into practice the 
concepts and skills learned in GEDU 519.
GEDU 525 Methods and Materials for Teaching English 
Language Learners (ELLs) Field Experience
1 credit
This 15-hour course is taken concurrently with GEDU 520 only 
by those pursuing ESL certification. During the field experience, 
graduate learners apply instructional strategies and put into practice 
the concepts and skills learned in GEDU 520.
GEDU 526 Autism Spectrum Disorder:  
Applied Behavior Analysis and Intervention 
3 credits
This course is designed to identify the components of applied 
behavior analysis (ABA) and the development of effective behavioral 
interventions pertaining to children and adolescents diagnosed 
along the autism spectrum. Focus is given to identification of the 
causes and function of behaviors, the assessment and diagnosis 
of behavioral issues, and the development and implementation 
of effective behavior and therapeutic treatment plans. The course 
participants will be able to assess, develop, implement, and evaluate 
effective behavioral and therapeutic intervention plans using a 
variety of positive behavioral supports and management techniques.
GEDU 527 Autism Spectrum Disorders: Field Experience 2
1 credit
This course is a field experience taken concurrently or upon 
completion of GEDU 526 Autism Spectrum Disorders: Applied 
Behavior Analysis and Interventions. The experiential learning 
takes place in an educational or therapeutic setting for 30 hours. The 
candidate observes, serves as a teacher aide, and begins to practice 
skills. Online communications are required during this course.
GEDU 531 Autism Spectrum Disorder:  
Strategies for Social Competence
3 credits
This course is designed to identify the components of language 
and social skills and the development of those skills as they 
pertain to children and adolescents with ASD. Emphasis will 
be placed on information processing and the development of 
language, communication strategies, pragmatics, augmentative, 
and alternative communication systems. This course will also focus 
on social skills deficits and approaches for teaching social skills 
to students with ASD.
GEDU 532 Autism Spectrum Disorders: Field Experience 3
1 credit
This course is a field experience taken concurrently or upon 
completion of GEDU 531 Autism Spectrum Disorders: Strategies 
for Social Competence. The experiential learning takes place in 
an educational or therapeutic setting for 30 hours. After approval 
from the cooperating teacher, the candidate is expected to take over 
most of the responsibilities of the day. Online communications 
are required.
GEDU 537 Special Education Overview
3 credits
This course provides candidates with a basic understanding of the 
federal mandates associated with special education. Candidates are 
introduced to the characteristics of various exceptionalities; pre-
referral strategies and interventions; cultural diversity; curricular 
and behavioral modifications, adaptations, and instructional 
strategies; educational assessment; historical legislations and 
current legal issues in special education; and the collaboration of 
regular education and special education teachers. Focus is on the 
special education process for evaluation, identification, eligibility 
determination, and placement of students with exceptionalities in 
special education.
GEDU 540 American Sign Language (ASL) I
3 credits
This course teaches a basic vocabulary of 300-500 signs used 
in ASL in conversational settings by Deaf and hearing signers. 
Graduate learners are introduced to important aspects of ASL 
grammar and culture and are given a brief introduction to hearing 
loss and some practical issues in the education of Deaf culture.
GEDU 541 American Sign Language (ASL) II 
Prerequisite: GEDU 540 
This course teaches more advanced vocabulary of signs used in 
ASL. It also analyzes conversational settings of various Deaf and 
hearing signers. Detailed aspects of ASL grammar and ASL culture 
are taught. A major emphasis is placed on expressive signing by 
graduate learners. Practical issues in Deaf culture and in Deaf 
education are discussed.
GEDU 543 Urban Education
3 credits
The course is designed to help teacher candidates, current teachers, 
or interested individuals from other related fields to understand the 
key issues and challenges confronting urban education in PreK-12 
classrooms, such as poverty, race, transience, a significant English 
Language Learner population, etc. Participants will examine 
culturally responsive practices; effective curriculum, instructional, 
and management strategies; and the need for cultivating supportive 
relationships in the urban setting. Additionally, participants have 
the opportunity to apply learned theories and knowledge from the 
course to teaching pedagogy in classrooms, in the teacher residency 
program, assigned field experiences, or in the general school setting.
82
GEDU 545 Current Legal Issues
3 credits
This course will address major areas of school law with particular 
emphasis on the Pennsylvania School Code. This course is designed 
to help teachers, especially new teachers, more successfully address 
a wide variety of issues they face on a day-to-day basis as working 
professionals. The course explores such topics as: an introduction 
to the court system in Pennsylvania and the United States, legal 
requirements for school staff such as Act 34 clearance, duties of 
teachers, how to successfully supervise nonprofessional employees 
and a wide variety of students, curriculum and instruction issues 
from a legal perspective. Special education, the Every Student 
Succeeds Act, and teacher requirements for the maintenance of 
classroom and school records will also be discussed.
GEDU 546 Integrating Mobile Technologies  
into the Classroom
3 credits
This course develops the knowledge and skills required to utilize 
and integrate mobile technology into an educator’s classroom and 
curriculum. The course will focus on topics such as finding and 
using mobile technologies to align with learning outcomes and 
activities; utilizing apps and mobile devices to enhance instruction, 
assessment and student engagement; incorporating mobile devices 
and tools into student created projects; and exploring a variety of 
discipline and subject specific apps and tools.
GEDU 550 Student Teaching 
6 credits 
Prerequisite: School of Education Permission 
This experience in the field encompasses one full semester of 
directed observation and supervised student teaching, with gradual 
assumption of total teaching responsibilities. This course is taken 
in conjunction with GEDU 690 Professional Seminar.
GEDU 557 Dealing with Difficult People
3 credits
The purpose of this course is to provide professionals with the 
opportunity to learn and apply skills allowing them to deal with 
difficult people in their work environment. All stakeholders in the 
education system can create roadblocks in terms of communication, 
action, and philosophical advancement. The information and 
skills taught and practiced in this course will arm educators with 
mechanisms that will guide them smoothly through these situations. 
Parents often pose the most challenges because of the passion that 
they exude as an advocate for their children, so much of the course 
will focus on this relationship paradigm and possible reactions 
to its shifts. A small portion will focus on dealing with difficult 
coworkers and supervisors as well.
GEDU 566 STEAM for the Classroom Teacher
3 credits
As STEAM, STEM, and Innovation Studios emerge in school 
settings across the region and the nation, participants explores 
innovative learning techniques to support these programs. 
Candidates can expect to engage in questions like: Why is 
educational innovation important? What does it do for our students? 
What are innovative educational techniques? How can educators 
employ innovative techniques in a variety of classroom settings? 
The course addresses the methods of visible thinking, project/
problem-based learning, human-centered design, and personalized 
learning, while providing opportunities for participant voice and 
choice in the exploration of additional methods.
GEDU 567 STEM Learning and Assessment/Practicum
3 credits
STEM Instructional Design and Assessment puts the theory learned 
in GEDU 566 STEAM for the Classroom Teacher into practice. 
Through experiences, articles, readings, and lesson design, learners 
develop the necessary skills needed to create an integrated STEM 
classroom. This course emphasizes the design of engaging STEM 
lessons and units that promote the 4 Cs: collaboration, creativity, 
critical thinking, and communication. The course equips students 
with the skillset that they need to create dynamic STEM lessons 
for their students.
GEDU 568 Leading the Way in STEM Education
3 credits
This comprehensive seven-week course empowers graduate 
learners to lead the way in STEM education, enabling them to 
foster a collaborative culture, establish real-world connections, and 
create authentic learning experiences. By the end of this course, 
educators will have the knowledge and skills needed to champion 
STEM education in their communities and to continue their own 
growth as STEM leaders.
GEDU 569 STEM Integrated Curriculum and Instruction
3 credits
Curriculum is a multi-faceted field of study directly linked to 
instruction and assessment. Through this course, candidates view 
curriculum as a body of knowledge and a process by exploring 
the theory, history, purposes, and evolution in curriculum. Factors 
which shape curriculum are thoroughly reviewed, and current 
trends are examined. A strong effort is made to provide practical 
information of specific relevancy to each participant.
GEDU 591 Seminar: Selected Topics in Education 
1 credit
GEDU 592 Seminar: Selected Topics in Education 
2 credits
GEDU 593 Seminar: Selected Topics in Education 
3 credits
83
Education
GEDU 600 Fundamentals of Applied Statistics
3 credits
Prerequisite: A beginning course in descriptive statistics.
This is an intermediate to advanced course in statistics applicable to 
educational research settings. The general emphasis is on commonly 
used inferential and parametric techniques with a brief review of 
descriptive statistics. Topics covered include correlation, linear 
and multiple regression, sampling and sampling distributions, 
t-test, chi-square, one and two factor Analysis of Variance, and 
parametric statistics.
GEDU 601 Action Research 
3 credits
This course provides graduate learners with an opportunity to gain 
an understanding of the action research process and to enhance 
their professional growth as research-practitioners. Participants 
engage in critical analysis of published professional literature 
and professional reflection while developing an action research 
proposal that can lead to improvements in curricular and/or 
instructional design.
GEDU 602 Program Reflection
0 credit
After completing eight key assessments throughout the core 
courses, this final 4-6-page submission answers a series of targeted 
questions that require graduate learners to reflect upon their entire 
experience in the program.
GEDU 604 Educational Tests and Measurements
3 credits
This course is aligned with national standards for teacher 
competence in assessment and is designed to prepare teachers 
to effectively use multiple measures of assessment to inform 
teaching practices. Specific skills include developing and utilizing 
assessments and interpreting assessment results.
GEDU 609 Inclusive Classroom Practices
3 credits 
This course explores elements needed to develop a productive 
learning environment for diverse learners and examines methods 
used to provide effective instruction to diverse students through the 
lens of collaboration, co-teaching, and research-based strategies.
GEDU 612 Leadership, Current Issues  
and the Teacher as Agent of Change
3 credits
A major theme in the master’s program is Teacher as Agent of 
Change. The graduate learner has the dual opportunity of exam-
ining leadership concepts and of applying those concepts to suc-
cessfully address current issues as they affect the school setting. 
In addition, graduate learners examine and build on their own 
leadership capacity.
GEDU 616 School and Community Relations 
3 credits
This course allows graduate learners to recognize the school as 
a dynamic cultural entity. Graduate learners assess the school’s 
interdependence on the community and its many stakeholders 
and identify the importance of a strong public relations plan that 
communicates with and understands the community involved.
GEDU 617 Administration of School Personnel
3 credits
This course studies dimensions in school personnel administration 
and includes the principles of recruitment, selection, and practices 
essential to a functional integration of the individual into the 
school system.
GEDU 621 School Curriculum 
3 credits
Curriculum is a multi-faceted field of study directly linked to 
instruction and assessment. Through this course, graduate learners 
view curriculum as a body of knowledge and a process by exploring 
the theory, history, purposes, and evolution in curriculum. Factors 
which shape curriculum are thoroughly reviewed, and current 
trends are examined. A strong effort is made to provide practical 
information with specific relevancy to each participant.
GEDU 623 Technology Literacy and Integration
3 credits
Educators need to be well-versed in current technologies. Effective 
teachers model and apply technology integration as they design, 
implement, and assess learning experiences to engage students and 
improve learning using technology. Through the use of online web 
resources and collaborative tools, graduate learners study, evaluate, 
and find applications for technology in their classrooms.
GEDU 624 Writing Project Summer Institute
3 credits
This course emphasizes improving student writing skills by using 
various methods of practicing writing across the curriculum.
GEDU 626 Foundations of Literacy
3 credits
This course explores components of the elementary reading pro-
gram: emergent literacy, phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency, 
vocabulary, and text comprehension, as well as literacy programs 
and procedures in the elementary school. State and national stan-
dards are also addressed.
GEDU 627 Content Literacy
3 credits
This course focuses on the examination of the reading process 
as it pertains to the content classroom. Specifically, this course 
examines current theory and best practices in integrating the 
language systems, thinking strategies, and instructional methods 
that support the content curricula. Practical strategies and materials 
84
to promote literacy, assessment, integration of technology, and 
literacy competencies in content areas, are the focal points of this 
course.
GEDU 628 Secondary Education Graduate Field Experience I
0 credit
This 60-hour experiential learning opportunity is an Observation 
and Exploration (Stages 1 and 2) experience in an educational 
setting assigned by the Coordinator of Clinical Experiences. The 
focus is on classroom interaction and student observation and is 
linked to GEDU 516.
GEDU 629 Secondary Education Graduate Field Experience II 
0 credit
This 60-hour experiential learning opportunity is a Pre-student 
teaching (Stage 3) experience and takes place in an educational 
setting assigned by the Coordinator of Clinical Experiences. In 
additional to observation, this field experience offers candidates the 
opportunity to teach all or parts of several lessons and to complete 
tasks at the direction of the cooperating teacher.
GEDU 632 Secondary Education Graduate Field Experience III 
0 credit
This 60-hour experiential learning opportunity is a Pre-student 
Teaching (Stage 3) experience and takes place in an educational 
setting assigned by the Coordinator of Clinical Experiences. The 
requirements of this field experience include teaching at least three 
lessons, planning a unit, and completing tasks at the direction of 
the cooperating teacher.
GEDU 634 Literacy Leadership
3 Credits
Prerequisites: GEDU 626 and GEDU 627
The course is designed to focus upon current issues in literacy 
and leadership. Graduate learners complete a 8-hour literacy and 
leadership practicum.
GEDU 637 Learning Theory 
3 credits
This course examines human learning processes, factors that 
influence learning, and major learning theories. Graduate 
learners relate learning theory to effective teaching practices and 
conduct research.
GEDU 638 Word Knowledge
3 credits
The deconstruction of a word provides insight into how the word 
is spoken, read, and leads the reader to have understanding of 
word meaning. This course provides an in-depth analysis into the 
history of phonics instruction, theoretical frameworks, and remedial 
techniques. Each stage of the continuum of phonics development 
is discussed and a plan for instruction is created. 
GEDU 639 Reading Clinic
3 credits
Prerequisites: GEDU 626, GEDU 627, and GEDU 631. This course 
is taken in conjunction with GEDU 631.
The course provides experience in formal and informal assessment 
and data interpretation. Graduate learners are responsible for 
implementation of instructional programs based upon assessment 
data. A 42-hour clinical practicum is required. See Master of 
Education Reading/ Reading Specialist Certification Program 
Online Overview.
GEDU 642 Writing Essentials
3 credits
This course delves into the developmental continuum of a writer 
in order to understand the student progression in writing. Knowing 
the continuum ensures intentional and responsive instruction that 
can provide student advancement in their writing ability. Further, 
this course defines the traits and genres of writing. 
GEDU 643 Overview of Curriculum Design
3 credits
This course is a study of styles and processes for implementing 
school curriculum, with a focus on the integration of literacy 
including reading, writing, listening, and speaking. The course 
addresses issues dealing with perceptions, professionalism, and 
change, and examines various school curriculum models including 
the Pennsylvania Department of Education Standards Aligned 
System for standards-based curriculum design.
GEDU 644 Student Centered Action Research
3 credits
The Student-Centered Action Resource Course is aligned with the 
Standards for Reading Professionals developed by the International 
Literacy Association. Teachers are introduced to the techniques 
involved in conducting action research. Action research allows 
teachers to investigate an evidence-based problem, collect data, 
and analyze the data to improve instructional decision making at 
the practitioner level that leads to improvements in curricular and 
instructional design.
GEDU 646 Assessment and Application 
This course prepares the candidate to evaluate the variances in 
reading strengths and weaknesses through the use of formal and 
informal diagnostic tools. This course is designed to provide an 
examination of traditional, as well as newly developed perspectives 
and insights necessary to provide for effective assessment and 
instruction for students with reading difficulties
GEDU 679 Curriculum Design and Instructional Technique 
in Environmental Education 
3 credits
Graduate learners explore various educational processes that deal 
with people’s relationship with their total environments, including 
the interaction of population, pollution, resource allocations 
85
Education
and depletions, conservation, transportation, and technology 
with a focus on urban and rural planning as it relates to the total 
human environment. Participants also review current programs 
and materials in environmental education as well as current 
research projects.
GEDU 690 Professional Seminar in Education 
3 credits
In this course, teacher candidates reflect upon the student teaching 
experience. Discussion focuses on current topics in education and 
the prediction and solution of issues in a variety of school situations. 
Candidates prepare for employment through activities connected 
with the construction of their professional portfolios. This course 
is taken in conjunction with GEDU 550 Student Teaching.
GEDU 696 Directed Research and Special Topics 
2-4 credits
Prerequisite: GEDU 601
In this course, students refine their research from the prerequisite 
courses and complete chapter 4 and 5 of their research paper.
GEDU 713 District-wide Supervisory Certificate in 
Curriculum and Instruction Internship 
(360 hours) 
3 credits
This course is the capstone experience of the District-wide 
Curriculum and Instruction Supervisory Certificate program. The 
course provides experiences for developing and enhancing the 
overall effectiveness of the candidate’s competencies. Emphasis 
is given to direct involvement in the administration of curriculum, 
instruction, and assessment at sites mutually acceptable to the 
candidate and the program coordinator.
GEDU 720 Quality Teaching, Continuous Improvement,  
and Professional Accountability
3 credits
This course focuses on the role of the principal as the instructional 
leader, along with collaborative efforts of the instructional staff, 
in bringing about quality teaching, continuous improvement, and 
professional accountability. By the end of the course, candidates are 
expected to demonstrate their understanding of school personnel 
policies and procedures that provide the organizational boundaries 
for accountability and the importance of school and community 
relations in an effective instructional program.
GEDU 721 The Principal as Agent of School Reform
3 credits
This course equips principal candidates with leadership skills 
and knowledge grounded in standards-based theory and design. 
Candidates are expected to be able to create a culture of teaching 
and learning in a school through effective leadership and operational 
management, effective communication, ethical behavior, and 
advocacy for children
GEDU 722 School Financial Management 
3 credits
This course examines the factors, including legal, that govern 
financial policies and practices in schools, sources of revenue, 
budgeting, disbursement of funds, school plant, records, and 
insurance. Emphasis is on knowledge and understanding of 
the major tasks and methods involved in meeting financial 
responsibilities in the school and the educational system.
GEDU 723 Legal Aspects of Educational Administration 
2 credits 
This course focuses on the major areas of school law with particular 
emphasis on the Pennsylvania School Code. The courses deals 
with topics such as tort liability of school officials and teachers, 
the legal structure of public education, control of pupil conduct, 
desegregation, church-school relations and education, teachers’ 
rights and responsibilities, pupils’ rights, professional negotiations, 
the courts and the curriculum, the use of school property and money, 
IDEA, FERPA, and issues in special education.
GEDU 725 Principal Introductory Internship
1 credit
This internship experience takes place throughout GEDU 720 
so candidates are involved in critical leadership responsibilities 
involving students, faculty, and staff; strategic planning; curriculum 
development; budgeting; and other key areas of district culture 
related to a principal’s position.
GEDU 726 School Financial Management Developmental 
Internship (35 hours) 
1 credit
This internship experience takes place throughout GEDU 722 so 
candidates are involved in examining factors governing financial 
policies and practices in schools, sources of revenue, budgeting, 
disbursement of funds, school plant, records, and insurance.
GEDU 727 Legal Aspects of Educational Administration 
Developmental Internship (20 hours) 
1 credit
This internship experience takes place throughout GEDU 723 so 
that candidates are involved in examining the major areas of school 
law with emphasis on the Pennsylvania School Code.
GEDU 728 Principal Mastery Internship (235 hours) 
3 credits
This course is the capstone leadership course in the principal 
preparation program. The internship requires candidates to work in 
a school district, initiating specific activities that provide leadership 
experience as an instructional leader and agent of school reform.
86
GEDU 729 Principal Certification Independent Study 
1-3 credits
This course is designed to provide graduate learners with the 
opportunity to organize and conduct research in educational 
administration under the supervision of a faculty member but 
independent of scheduled meetings and regular assignments.
GEDU 730 Diverse Learner Competencies for School Leaders
2 credits
This course develops the knowledge and skills required to provide 
leadership for the development of programs for diverse learners. 
The course focuses on issues such as over representation of diverse 
students in special education, prevention and early intervention, 
and effective instructional strategies for students with disabilities 
in inclusive settings.
GEDU 731 Diverse Learner Competencies Internship  
(35 hours) 
1 credit
The internship experience takes place throughout GEDU 730 and 
is designed for the practical application of skills and concepts 
learned in the course.
GEDU 732 The Principal Professional Portfolio 
1 credit
Throughout the principal certification program, candidates develop 
a professional portfolio of artifacts under the guidance of a mentor/
portfolio advisor.
GEDU 740 The Superintendent as Architect  
of Standards Based Reform
3 credits	
The course begins with establishing the urgency for school reform 
by examining the assumptions that reinforce the status quo. The 
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) and past school reform models 
are reviewed to gain an understanding of their implications to school 
systems. Superintendent candidates then explore practical aspects 
of guiding systems through the standards-based reform process.
GEDU 741 Superintendent as Strategic System Leader
3 credits	
This course is grounded in the continuum of systems thinking 
and operating principles needed for strategic planning that leads 
to improved student achievement. A broad-based view of current 
research is reviewed and practical application of the research 
is discussed.
GEDU 742 Educational Facilities and School Plant 
2 credits
This course is designed to familiarize the prospective administrator 
with the issues and problems of new plant construction, the 
renovation and rehabilitation of existing buildings, and facility 
maintenance. The utilization of demographic, curricular, resource, 
and energy data, as well as state building construction guidelines, 
are presented and examined.
GEDU 743 Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations 
2 credits	
This course enhances leadership through the study of negotiations 
and labor relations in public education. Topics and issues 
explored include an in-depth analysis of contract negotiations, 
grievance procedures, mediation, and arbitration for all school 
employees. Theories and practices in staff recruitment, selection, 
assignment, orientation, evaluation, professional development, and 
retrenchment are studied.
GEDU 744 Business Administration  
and Finance in Public Education 
3 credits
This course identifies and assesses methods of educational planning 
and financing for staff, instructional processes, and physical plant; 
the study of federal and state funding sources; the nature of taxing 
authorities; the subsidy system; grants and entitlements to public 
education; and future trends and options in creative financial 
planning. An in-depth investigation of budget preparation, long 
and short-term investing, bonding, under-writing, tax collecting, 
and construction planning takes place.
GEDU 745 Educational Facilities and School Plant  
Developmental Internship (20 hours)
1 credit 
This course is taken throughout GEDU 742 and is designed for the 
practical application of skills and concepts learned in the course.
GEDU 746 Collective Bargaining and Labor Relations 
Developmental Internship (35 hours)
1 credit 
This course is taken throughout GEDU 743 and is designed for the 
practical application of skills and concepts learned in the course.
GEDU 747 Business Administration and Finance in  
Public Education Developmental Internship  
(35 hours)
1 credit 
This course is taken throughout GEDU 744 and is designed for the 
practical application of skills and concepts learned in the course.
GEDU 748 Superintendent Introductory Internship (35 hours)
1 credit 
This course is taken throughout GEDU 740 and is designed for the 
practical application of skills and concepts learned in the course.
GEDU 749 Superintendent Certification Independent Study 
1-3 credits
This course is designed to provide graduate learners with the 
opportunity to organize and conduct research in educational 
administration under the supervision of a faculty member but 
independent of scheduled meetings and regular assignments.
87
Electrical and Cyber Engineering
GEDU 750 Superintendent Mastery Internship (235 hours) 
3 credits 
This course is the capstone leadership course in the superintendent 
preparation program. The candidate is required to work in a 
district to initiate specific activities that will provide leadership 
opportunities in the role of the superintendent as strategic 
system leader.
GEDU 751 Superintendent Professional Portfolio 
1 credit 
Throughout the superintendent certification program, candidates 
develop a professional portfolio of artifacts under the guidance of 
a mentor/portfolio advisor.
GUAP 520-597 Special Topics
3 credits
GUEC 550-599 Special Topics
3 credits
GUSD 530-562 Special Topics
3 credits
Important Note: Current Pennsylvania Department of Education 
(PDE) standards and regulations take precedence over any 
information described in this catalog. Should those standards 
and regulations change, Gannon University will change its 
requirements. Candidates will be responsible for meeting the new 
guidelines for certification. Please refer to the PDE website at www.
education.pa.gov for changes in regulations.
Electrical 
and Cyber 
Engineering
Director: Wookwon Lee, D.Sc., P.E.
INTRODUCTION
The world of electrical and cyber engineering is an ever-changing 
one. The advances in technologies over a new graduate’s 
professional career of approximately 40 years will be phenomenal. 
While the undergraduate coursework puts a solid foundation in 
mathematics, engineering science, and humanities, as well as the 
ability to tackle and solve new problems in a forthright manner, 
graduate school is the next step in a lifetime of learning for both 
new graduates and experienced working professionals who have 
been out a few years and recognize the need for more education.
The graduate program in Electrical and Cyber Engineering (ECE) 
is designed to provide advanced studies for those who wish to 
continue preparation for effective participation in the professions 
of electrical, software, and systems engineering. The program 
also provides continuing education in advanced subjects for 
experienced working engineers who desire to stay abreast of the 
rapidly changing technological world. Emphasis is placed on the 
development of the engineer’s capacity for independent study and 
continued professional growth.
PROGRAM OBJECTIVES:
The program is designed to guide students to build technical 
competency, and effective communication and leadership skills. 
1.	 Demonstrate professional ethics and personal values in daily 
and professional life that exercise informed literary and aesthetic 
judgments by leveraging diverse cultures and societies
2.	 Demonstrate teamwork and leadership qualities and/or 
attainment of leadership roles in a global work environment
3.	 Demonstrate technical competency in applying comprehensive 
engineering knowledge throughout their chosen profession 
DEGREES OFFERED
Housed in the College of Engineering and Business, the program 
offers:
•	 Master of Science in Electrical Engineering (MSEE) degree 
and
•	 Master of Science in Embedded Software Engineering 
(MSES) degree.
88
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1.	 Applicants must have earned a Bachelor’s degree in Electrical 
or Computer Engineering from an ABET accredited program 
or its equivalent with a QPA of 2.5 or better.
2.	 Applicants with non-electrical or computer engineering degrees 
may be admitted, but required to take additional course work as 
determined by the program director.
3.	 Applicants must submit the following:
	
•		 Completed application
	
•		 Transcripts for all prior college coursework
	
•		 Three recommendation letters
	
•		 TOEFL scores if English is not the first language
CURRICULUM
Upon commencement of graduate studies, the student will choose to 
study for an Electrical Engineering or Embedded Software degree. 
The student will be assigned an initial advisor by the program 
director. The advisor and student will select appropriate courses for 
the objectives of the student and obtain approval of this course of 
study through the academic approval sequence. All students must 
take the following two courses for the first 12 credits: 
Course Requirements for Electrical Engineering:
GECE 502 	
Embedded C Programming
GECE 504	
Advanced Engineering Analysis 
Course Requirements for Embedded Software Engineering:
GECE 502	
Embedded C Programming
GECE 503	
Embedded OS Application Programming 
All students must complete at least one systems development course 
before graduation. Systems development courses include:
GECE 501 	
Engineering Project and Management
GENG 580 	
Requirements Engineering
GENG 570 	
Introduction to Systems Engineering
After the student has completed 12 credits of study, the student will 
be assessed relative to their preparedness to begin thesis or project 
work. The candidate must have a 3.0 QPA to continue for the degree. 
The candidate must then choose one of the three projects/thesis 
plans below for completion of their degree and an advisor will be 
assigned to guide the candidate for the completion of the degree 
work. Students cannot register for project/thesis credits until after 
12 credits of graduate work are completed (see plans A, B, and C 
below). The degrees require a total of 30 credit hours of graduate 
work. Up to 6 credits of approved graduate work can be transferred 
from another graduate program.
Graduate students intending to pursue two Master’s degrees 
simultaneously (see Dual Majors for more information) or a second 
Master’s degree (see Second Master’s Degree for more information) 
in the Electrical and Cyber Engineering department must be first 
admitted into the second-degree program before any coursework 
toward the second Master’s degree.
Plan A (Thesis):
The candidate will be required to submit a 6 credit thesis as part 
of the 30 credits of graduate course work and pass a final oral 
examination on the thesis material and related subjects. The thesis 
work must be approved by the faculty and program director prior 
to the commencement of the research work. The thesis advisor 
will direct the student’s work and determine when to recommend 
the manuscript for review by a faculty committee. The review 
committee will be appointed by the program director and shall 
consist of at least three full-time Gannon engineering faculty 
members familiar with the subject material and one member outside 
the ECE department. The outside member can be from industry. 
The faculty advisor will be the chair of the review committee.
Plan B (Project):
The student will be required to complete a design project and 
to pass a final examination covering the student’s project and 
related subject areas. The project can be worth 3 or 6 credits as 
part of the 30 credits of graduate course work depending on the 
difficulty of the project. The project must be approved by the 
faculty and program director prior to the commencement of the 
project work. The project advisor will direct the student’s work 
and determine when to recommend the manuscript for review by 
a faculty committee. The review committee will be appointed by 
the faculty and program director and shall consist of at least three 
full-time Gannon engineering faculty members familiar with the 
subject material and the faculty advisor will be the chair of the 
review committee.
Plan C (Project Course):
The student will be required to complete a 3 credit course designated 
as a project course. The program director will approve the project 
course prior to the commencement of the project work and 
must include a significant project for its completion. The course 
instructor will inform the student of the complete requirements for 
the project course and oversee the work to ensure that the student 
satisfies these requirements. Students are required to prepare a 
manuscript in the thesis format for the project.
DEGREE PROGRAMS
Electrical Engineering Degree
The program’s goal is to give an Electrical and Cyber Engineering 
graduate the necessary education to be an effective design or 
systems engineer. The student shall devise a curriculum with his/
her advisor to pursue knowledge in advanced control theory, system 
modeling, electronics, communication, systems engineering, and 
embedded software. The student must complete at least 9 credits 
of Electrical Engineering program courses and satisfy the project/ 
thesis requirement in Electrical Engineering.
89
Electrical and Cyber Engineering
Embedded Software Engineering Degree
The program’s goal is to give an Electrical and Cyber Engineering 
graduate the necessary education to be an effective embedded 
software/systems engineer. The student shall devise a curriculum 
with his/her advisor to pursue knowledge in computer hardware 
and software implementation strategies, software development, 
software quality measures, software design and testing techniques, 
microprocessors, digital system design and/or hardware description 
languages. The student must complete at least 9 credits of 
Embedded Software Engineering program courses in system, 
software, hardware categories, and satisfy the project/thesis 
requirement in a topic related to Embedded Software Engineering.
Five-Year Accelerated B.S./M.S.
The Five-Year Bachelor of Science/Master of Science degree 
in Electrical Engineering is designed to allow outstanding 
undergraduate students the opportunity to earn both an undergraduate 
and a graduate degree within five years. Admission into the 
accelerated Five-Year B.S./M.S. program will be based on several 
factors, including past academic performance, and considerations of 
overall aptitude and maturity. Students in their junior year, second 
semester (or one semester before reaching senior standing) with a 
minimum 2.8 cumulative GPA, can apply for this program. Students 
accepted into this program should plan to complete specific first-
year graduate courses during the senior year, and in the following 
summer term, with completion of all degree requirements in the 
following academic year. Students admitted to the Five-Year 
B.S./M.S. program may apply up to 6 graduate credits towards 
completion of the B.S. degree.
CO-OP Track
The objective of the CO-OP track is to present an academic 
program combined with application training on actual industrial 
problems in engineering environments. This is to give students a 
targeted education on real-world problems. Students may join this 
program after completing sufficient coursework to succeed in an 
industrial environment and receive approved industrial sponsorship. 
International students participating in a CO-OP are required to 
contact the Office of Global Support and Student Engagement 
to apply for Curricular Practical Training before engaging in any 
CO-OP activity.
Students accepted to the co-op track are assigned a Gannon 
professor as a mentor, and must take the Graduate Professional 
Experience (GENG 700-series) course each semester they are 
enrolled in the program.
Students must complete 30 credits of graduate course work in 
addition to their Graduate Professional Experience courses. 
Students must maintain a cumulative grade point average of at least 
3.0 for the duration of their master’s degree program, and fulfill all 
other requirements for their degree.
Professional Track
Gannon runs a two-year work-study program with the local 
industry in Erie. The objective of the track is to present an academic 
program combined with application training on actual industrial 
problems to give students a targeted education, complemented by 
hands-on, real-world development exposure. Students are selected 
for this track based on academic background, leadership skills, 
and communication skills. The student is assigned a Gannon 
professor as a mentor while working at the industrial site. The 
mentor advises the student on his academic work and guides the 
student on industrial engineering projects. The projects are carefully 
chosen to reinforce classroom work and to develop the students into 
outstanding engineers. In addition to the mentorship in technical 
areas, the professor also mentors the student in leadership skills, 
work and personal ethics, and communication skills that are needed 
in the industrial workplace. This track requires that the student work 
on these projects half time during the school year and full time 
during the summer. The students receive full tuition and a yearly 
stipend for their work. Students need to apply and be accepted 
separately for this program. The number of students in this track 
is dependent on the availability of industrial sponsorship.
The students earn either an Electrical Engineering degree or an 
Embedded Software Engineering degree. There are two tracks for 
the program:
Embedded Software track (leads to Embedded Software degree) and 
the Systems and Modeling track (leads to Electrical Engineering 
degree). All students in the professional track must have an 
equivalent background (academic or professional) in Automatic 
Control. Furthermore, all students in the Embedded Software track 
must have an equivalent background in C++ and Data Structures. 
The recommended curriculum is as follows:
Embedded Software		 	
	
Systems and Modeling
Summer Second Session	
Intro to Embedded Systems		
Intro to Embedded Systems
Orientation and Curricular 	 	
Orientation and Curricular 
Practical Training (CPT)	
	
Practical Training (CPT)
Fall First Semester	
Engineering Analysis I#*	
	
Engineering Analysis I#*
Requirements Engineering*		
Requirements Engineering*
Adv Digital Design	 	 	 	
	
System Modeling*
CPT	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
	 	 	
	
CPT
Spring Second Semester	
Engineering Analysis II*	
	
Engineering Analysis II*
Embedded Kernel*	 	 	 	
	
Adv Programming in C/C++
Embedded Systems Design*	
Electric Machine Modeling*
CPT	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
	 	 	
	
CPT
90
Summer	
CPT	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
	 	 	
	
CPT
Fall Third Semester
RTOS Applications+		 	 	
	
Control of Electric Drives
Hw/Sw Co-design	 	 	 	
	
Power Electronics 
Personal Software Process*		
Elective
CPT	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
	 	 	
	
CPT
Spring Fourth Semester 	
Project/thesis		 	
	
	 	 	
	
Project/thesis
Elective		
	 	 	
	
	 	 	
	
Digital Control
Elective 		
	 	 	
	
	 	 	
	
Elective
CPT	 	 	 	
	 	 	
	
	 	 	
	
CPT
# Substitutions for this course may be approved by the advisor and 
Department Chair.
* Required courses for professional track
+ special topic electives
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Courses of Interest for All Options
GECE 501 Engineering Project and Management	
3 credits
This is one of the core courses for electrical and cyber engineering 
graduate students. The engineering development process from 
inception to a product will be covered. The function of systems 
engineering is to guide the engineering of complex systems that 
is the collection of components, people, facilities, and procedures 
organized to accomplish some common objectives. This course will 
focus on the skills required to manage the development of effective 
system architectures from concept through engineering design and 
production. Topics include, but are not limited to, the structure 
of complex systems, project management, system development 
process, requirement specifications, functional decomposition, 
system modeling techniques and modern toolsets, hardware-in-the- 
loop simulation and control, system testing, and oral and written 
communication issues.
GECE 502 Embedded C Programming
3 credits
This course is designed for students to build a solid foundation 
in embedded programming using the C language. Intermediate 
C programming techniques and embedded environment 
considerations will be discussed. Contents of the course include C 
and embedded systems, program structure, variables and memory 
implication, ﬂow control, arrays, pointers, structure and union, 
functions, I/O’s, preprocessor directives, GNU development tools, 
and basic UNIX/LINUX operations.
GECE 503 Embedded OS Application Programming
3 credits
This course teaches the student how to architect an embedded 
Linux environment for a distributed co-operating multi-
application environment. The course explores how to leverage 
the Linux programming, inter-process communication, and 
shell programming. Topics also include bootup, scheduling of 
applications, and load balancing across multiple cores. 
GECE 504 Advanced Engineering Analysis 
3 credits
This course focuses on theory and application of linear algebra, 
ordinary differential equations, Laplace transform, Fourier analysis, 
partial differential equation, probability and statistics for solving 
engineering problems. Application of Matlab. 
GECE 509 Software Tools
3 credits
Prerequisite: GENG 585
Focus on the Unix programming environment and the various 
tools for software development, application environments and 
techniques. Topics include operating systems, standards, real- 
time programming, concurrency, software testing, metrics, IPC 
techniques, scripting, compilers, interactive debugging.
GENG 570 Introduction to Systems Engineering
3 credits
The function of systems engineering is to guide the engineering 
of complex systems, that is the collection of components, people, 
facilities and procedures organized to accomplish some common 
objectives. This course explores the life cycle of systems, and the 
skills required to manage the development of effective system 
architectures from concepts through engineering design and 
production. Topics include, but are not limited to the structure 
of complex systems, system development processes, systems 
engineering management, needs analysis, systems requirements 
management, program risk, functional analysis and design, 
integration and system evaluation.
GENG 580 Requirements Engineering
3 credits
Requirements engineering process from initial requirements 
elicitation through to requirements validation for systems 
engineering. The course includes specific techniques for the 
analysis, modeling, validation, and management of requirements 
for engineering projects, and is applicable to software, mechanical, 
electrical, process and other types of engineering projects. Topics 
include requirements processes, documents, elicitation, analysis, 
management, modeling, viewpoint analysis, non-functional 
requirements, advanced topics.
91
Electrical and Cyber Engineering
GENG 582 Fuzzy Control 
3 credits
This course provides a fundamental understanding of fuzzy logic 
with application to control theory. The methodology provides a 
method for constructing nonlinear controllers via the use of heuristic 
information for real-world problems. The fuzzy controller emulates 
the decision-making process of the human. Engineering evaluations 
of performance and comparative analysis with conventional control 
methods are used.
GENG 585 Advanced Programming In C/C++ 	
3 credits
Problem analysis. Translation path from pseudo-code to 
implementation. Comparison of C and C++ implementations. 
Critical evaluation of time, memory, and program structure. 
Programming style.
GENG 586 Object-Oriented Modeling 
3 credits
Prerequisite: GENG 580 or GCIS 504 or 566 or 567 or permission 
of instructor
An advanced treatment of methods for producing an object-oriented 
design, including structural, behavioral, and architectural design. 
Focus is on Object-Oriented analysis and design methods and 
design processes they support. Includes treatment of the Unified 
Modeling Language (UML) techniques and their application to 
systems/software development
GENG 590-599 Special Topics in Engineering 
3 credits
Special courses developed from study interest in all areas of 
Engineering. Brief description of current content to be announced 
in the schedule of classes.
GENG 603 Engineering Analysis I
3 credits
The theory and application to engineering problems of Laplace 
transforms, generalized Fourier transforms and Linear Algebra. 
GENG 609 Nonlinear Analysis 
3 credits
Introduction to the understanding of nonlinear characteristic 
of mechanical and electrical components and systems. Basic 
analytical, graphical and numerical methods are presented. 
Introduction to chaotic dynamics and nonlinear control. 
GENG 648 Modeling and Simulation of Dynamic Systems
3 credits
This interdisciplinary course presents mathematical modeling 
methods for physical dynamic systems containing electrical, 
mechanical, and control components. Included are the application 
of physical principles, energy approaches, non-dimensional 
techniques, and discretization of continuous systems. Numerical 
simulation of linear and nonlinear models will be studied and 
compared to experimental results. Problems of current interest will 
be used as examples.
GENG 678 System Testing 
3 credits
Prerequisite: GENG 586
This course covers the fundamentals of testing engineering systems 
and their models. Includes coverage of types of testing, fundamental 
problems in testing, purposes for testing, testcase design, quality 
assurance and test planning. Topics include prototype testing, 
validation testing, acceptance testing, and other topics.
GENG 689 Stability Analysis of Multidimensional  
Dynamic Systems
3 credits
Fundamental concepts of stability for carious classes of dynamic 
systems are examined and discussed. The systems considered 
include multidimensional lumped-parameter systems that can 
be described by linear differential equations. The systems under 
consideration are divided into certain well-defined classes, 
and various phenomena related to vibrations and stability of 
these systems are exposed systematically. Although the course 
examples are drawn from mechanical systems, the general nature 
of formulation can be applied to systems of similar nature in other 
disciplines, such as electrical circuits.
GENG 690-699 Special Topics in Engineering
3 credits
Special courses developed from study interest in all areas of 
Engineering. Brief description of current content to be announced 
in the schedule of classes. Graduate courses in the 600 series are 
open to graduate students only.
GENG 700-702 Graduate Professional Experience	
1 credit
Prerequisite: Discipline-specific industrial sponsorship
This course complements regular academic training with hands-
on, real-world development exposure. Students are required to 
be engaged in practical training during the course. International 
students require Curricular Practical Training (CPT) approval. 
Topics include issues facing engineering and computing 
professionals, trends in the fields, job prospects, team and 
workplace behavior, project leadership as well as reviews of 
speaking, listening, reading and writing skills.
GENG 703 Engineering Analysis II
3 credits
Solving engineering problems using ordinary differential equations, 
partial differential equations, series solutions to differential 
equations. Complex analysis applied to engineering problems.
GENG 796 Directed Project	
3-6 credits
Those students choosing their research project option will complete 
a directed research project. The student must submit a project 
proposal to the department for approval. Upon approval of the topic, 
the department Chair will appoint a three-member committee to 
oversee the project. The student will perform the literature search, 
complete the project, and submit a project report that conforms to 
department thesis guidelines, and pass an oral defense.
92
GENG 797 Thesis
3-6 credits
Those students choosing the thesis option must select a directed 
project with a research component. The student must submit a 
thesis proposal to the department for approval. Upon approval 
of the topic, the department Chair will appoint a three-member 
committee to oversee the project. The student will perform the 
literature search, complete the project, submit a thesis report that 
conforms to department thesis guidelines, and pass an oral defense. 
Additionally, thesis students are expected to submit a paper on their 
work suitable for publication.
Courses of Interest for  
Embedded Software Engineering Option
GECE 500 Introduction to Embedded Systems
3 credits*
This course orients students to embedded system concepts and 
gives different embedded system applications. The course is 
structured as a series of lectures and training sessions at General 
Electric Transportation System work site. Topics include but not 
restricted to the following: Software QSP/QSW, DC locomotive 
overview, ISO9000 overview, CSE overview, Toll Gate overview, 
OTC overview, DFSS training, Software Process, Traction System 
overview, RMD overview, OHV overview, System Integration 
overview, IFC overview, Formal Technical overview, DC Simulator 
overview, FTR recording, Simulink training.
*3 credit hours – does not apply toward the degree requirement.
GECE 506 Personal Software Process
3 credits
Prerequisite: GENG 585
The Personal Software Process (PSP) is a process-based method 
that software engineers use in the development of large-scale 
projects. It uses quality management principles and the Capability 
Maturity Model (CMM) framework to demonstrate the benefits of 
using sound engineering principles in software development and 
maintenance work. Defect management, design and code reviews, 
design templates, and process analysis will be used. Here, the 
students progress through a sequence of software processes that 
provide a sound foundation for large scale software development.
GECE 508 Embedded Software Paradigms
3 credits
Prerequisites: GENG 585 
Course focuses on the design and development of embedded and 
real-time systems. Embedded software design techniques and 
considerations. Overview of embedded systems and software design 
processes. Systems and software quality considerations. Hardware 
tools and trends.
GECE 510 Software Engineering Processes
3 credits
Prerequisite: GENG 585
Fundamental embedded software design techniques and 
considerations. Fundamental Method Goals of quantity, 
repeatability, measurability. Design and Analysis Methodologies 
focusing on object-oriented design and testing. Design processes 
of waterfall, spiral, and knowledge-based. Risk analysis, software 
project management, including knowledge strategies plus 
economics and metrics of a software project.
GECE 511 Embedded Kernel
3 credits
Real-time embedded kernel development and implementation. 
Begins with the implementation of a non-preemptive kernel, add 
features, and transform into a preemptive kernel. Topics include 
interrupt management, time management, task management, 
inter-task communication and synchronization, and memory 
management.
GECE 512 Trusted OS
3 credits
Prerequisite: GECE 502
This course covers basic understanding and configuration for 
hardening and securing an embedded Linux operating system. 
Topics include boot-time configurations and forensics, user and 
directory hardening, application vulnerability minimization, and 
minimizing memory attacks. The course will focus on a common 
Linux distribution architecture, security modules, cryptography 
tools, and how the system works. The student will experience 
securing the system, applying tools and secured applications as a 
user and administrator.
GECE 515 Software Testing and Quality Assurance
3 credits
This course is concerned with understanding the role of quality 
assurance in the software development cycle and applying these 
techniques to software products. Course topics include test 
design methods, test planning, automated test support, quality 
measurement and quality tracking techniques.
GECE 539 Real-time System Implementation 
3 credits
This is a project-oriented course. It is designed for students to get 
familiarity and hands-on experiences with the real-time system 
implementation process using Matlab Real-time Workshop and 
Real-time Workshop Embedded Coder tools.
GECE 543 Cyber Physical Systems
3 credits 
This course covers creating cyber-physical systems (CPS) from 
cyber and physical systems developed via high-level modeling 
and virtual/real prototyping. Topics include MATLAB/Simulink 
modeling as a means to swiftly compose and analyze physical 
processes; finite state machines and logic simulations for 
93
Electrical and Cyber Engineering
design and analysis of physical models; real prototyping of an 
autonomous driving robot (ADR) for advanced implementation 
and verification of a preliminary CPS; and a hybrid virtual and 
real prototyping of a safety-enabled ADR as a CPS to observe the 
safety of ADR operations. Different-levels of system modeling, 
analysis, simulation, and prototyping platforms and tools will be 
used throughout the coursework.
GECE 544 Digital Design with HDL & Lab
3 credits 
Prerequisite: GECE 502
This is a hands-on course for virtual prototyping of digital system 
design and verification with hardware description language (HDL). 
Various scales and types of digital systems, including combinatorial 
and sequential logic circuits, FSM designs, and memory and bus 
systems, are reviewed. Hands-on HDL programming skills are 
exercised by performing representation, simulation, verification, 
and synthesis of the digital systems with extensive lab practices 
and assignments. Xilinx ISE integrated design and development 
environment will be used throughout the course lab exercises.
GECE 545 Advanced Digital Design
2 credits 
Co-requisite: Take concurrently with GECE 546. 
Advanced topics in top-down digital design and bottom-up 
verification are introduced. Combinatorial and sequential logic 
design, circuit aspects of logic devices, families, and interfaces are 
reviewed. CAD tools using schematic and hardware description 
language based design entry for simulation, synthesis; post-
synthesis analysis and implementation on a programmable target 
device are exposed. Industry-standard integrated design and 
development environments will be used throughout the course.
GECE 546 Advanced Digital Design Lab
1 credit
Laboratory to accompany GECE 545 Advanced Digital Logic. 
Must be taken concurrently with GECE 545.
GECE 547 Embedded Systems Design
3 credits
This is a project-oriented course. It is designed to deliver the 
concepts of microprocessor-based design ﬂow and hardware/
software design integration. Discussions include CPU architectures, 
instruction sets, interrupts, peripheral configurations, software 
development, real-time operating system, as well as hardware-in-
the-loop debugging
and testing.
GECE 549 VHDL	
3 credits
This is an introductory course for the VHDL hardware description 
language that targets the programmable logic and ASIC design. The 
usage of the language in representation, simulation, verification and 
synthesis areas is studied with extensive lab assignments. Essential 
syntax and semantics of the VHDL language including design 
entity, architectural bodies, concurrent and sequential statements, 
processes, data types, packages, configurations, register transfer 
level design are among the covered topics.
GECE 550 Hw/Sw Co-Design
3 credits
Top-down system level embedded design for large-scale 
systems containing hardware and software components are 
considered. Development flow shall include a) requirements 
to design specifications b) hardware and software partitioning 
c) trade off analysis between self-development and reuse for 
intellectual property and real-time OS d) HDL-based hardware 
design, simulation and testing, e) OO software design, simulation 
and verification.
GECE 551 Rapid Prototyping with FPGA
3 credits
Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) has become an essential
part of the digital system design ﬂow for many applications. They 
provide inexpensive solutions for hardware prototypes and the 
fastest time-to-market. The novelty and programmability also 
allow design explorations towards optimal architecture. This 
course will cover the FPGA features and architectures, rapid 
prototyping aspects of FPGA use, FPGA configuration techniques, 
hardware simulation and debugging, as well as the modern digital 
synthesis and hardware analysis skills and tools. Other commercial 
programmable logic devices (PLD) will also be discussed.
GECE 552 Data Integrity on Computer Networks
3 credits
This course provides the concepts, theory (algorithms) and 
techniques (protocols/standard) to deliver data integrity on 
computer networking. Topics include Data Integrity on data 
communication (i.e., Transmission Media, and Transmission 
and Multiplexing) and on computer network (i.e., Data Security, 
Flow Control, Wire/Wireless network, and Internet Protocols/
Applications/Programming). Students perform Data Integrity on 
data communication (1/2) and on computer network (1/2).
GECE 553 Real-Time Simulator
3 credits
This course provides the concepts and hardware/software modeling 
techniques to deliver real-time data processing and signal 
acquisition on real-time applications. Topics include hardware 
modeling based on FPGA implementation in VHDL and software 
modeling based on Matlab/Simulink.
GENG 586 Object-Oriented Modeling 
3 credits**
** Please see course description in the Course of Interest  
for All Options
94
Courses of Interest  
for Electrical Engineering Option
GECE 520 Advanced Instrumentation and Measurement
3 credits
This course emphasizes the use of National Instruments (NI) 
tools to perform data acquisition, measurement techniques and 
instrument control. Data acquisition will include analog and digital 
I/O, signal conditioning and sensors. Measurement techniques 
will include time-frequency analysis, data filtering, and distortion 
measurements. Instrument control will include serial port, GPIB 
communications and instrument drivers.
GECE 521 VLSI Design	
3 credits
Focuses on the theory, design, implementation, and testing of Very 
Large Scale Integrated (VLSI) Circuits and associated technologies. 
Primarily focuses on CMOS technologies and their implementation. 
Includes a review of CMOS circuits and theory, overview of MOS 
fabrication technology, circuit characterizations and performance 
estimation, electrical and physical design of logic gates, clocking 
strategies, I/O structures, system design and test methods, design 
synthesis, and advanced topics.
GECE 527 Intro to Electric Drives
3 credits
This course uses an integrative approach to allow examination 
of all subsystems that make up an electric drive system. The 
approach requires minimum prerequisites in circuit and system 
and electromagnetic field theory to understand the essentials of 
the topics covered. The topics covered include electric machines, 
power-electronics-based converters, understanding mechanical 
system requirements, feedback controller design, and interaction 
of drives with the utility grid. 
GECE 528 Modern Control Theory
3 credits
Linear spaces and operators, mathematical descriptions of systems. 
Linear dynamical systems and impulse response, matrices. 
Controllability and observability of linear dynamical systems. 
Irreducible realizations of rational transfer function matrices. 
Canonical forms, state feedback and state estimators. Stability 
of linear systems. Composite systems; linear optimal control and 
linear distributed systems.
GECE 529 Digital Control
3 credits
This course deals with the control of dynamic systems by 
employing classical and model control tools incorporating a digital 
computer in the control loop. It provides the background needed 
for those practicing engineers, who have studied the concepts of 
continuous-time control, to enhance their knowledge in the area 
of digital control system. Topics include the Z-transform, digital 
control system design, filters design, and the state-space approach 
to control system design. Modern software tools such as Matlab/
Simulink will be used. 
GECE 530 Sensors and Actuators 
3 credits
This is an introductory course on the subject of control system 
instrumentation, with an emphasis on sensors, transducer, and 
actuators. Specifically, this course deals with “instrumentation” 
a control system through the incorporation of suitable sensors, 
actuators, and associated interface hardware. The control system 
architectures are reviewed first prior to detailed discussion of 
the component interconnection and signal conditioning, and 
performance specification and analysis. Then the operation 
principles and characteristics of a series of analog sensors and 
digital transducers are studied. Finally, the stepper motors, as well 
as continuous-drive actuators (DC and AC motors), are covered.
GECE 531 Electronic Systems Design and Integration
3 credits
This is a hands-on laboratory-based course with emphasis on 
design and integration of electronic systems. Industry-standard 
tools such as the circuit simulation software (e.g. Orcad Capture 
CIS, PSpice), the Printed Circuit Board (PCB) design software 
(e.g. Cadence Layout Plus), PCB maker (e.g. LPKF ProtoMat), 
and its related software (e.g. CircuitCam) will provide the platform 
to build, test, and validate systems/subsystems, such as basic 
OP-AMP circuits, analog computer, traffic light control, power 
subsystems, bridge driver subsystem, and driver system integration. 
Electronic systems design and integration will be emphasized 
through laboratory projects. 
GECE 537 Advanced Computer Architecture
3 credits
Focuses on the design and implementation of the instruction-set 
architecture. Performance measures, ALU design, data and control 
path design, evolving into custom high-performance processor 
design using VHDL, pipelining, memory hierarchy design, cache 
memory and advanced topics.
GECE 545 Advanced Digital Design
2 credits*
GECE 546 Advanced Digital Design Lab
1 credit*
GECE 547 Embedded Systems Design
3 credits*
GECE 549 VHDL
3 credits*
GECE 552 Data Integrity on Computer Networks 
3 credits*
GECE 553 Real-Time Simulator
3 credits*
95
Electrical and Cyber Engineering
GECE 556 RF Circuit Integration
3 credits
Application of concepts from Circuits, Electronics and Fields to 
radio frequency design techniques as applied to state-of-the-art 
electronic devices.
GECE 565 Power Electronics
3 credits
This course introduces the basic concepts of various topologies (ac-
dc, dc-dc, dc-ac, ac-ac, etc.) of power converters. The fundamental 
principles of switching components are discussed first prior to 
introduction of the design and application of the converters. 
Emphases are on the design issues associated with the converters 
and the computer techniques (PSpice) used for the performance 
evaluation and analysis. Experiments are part of the course. 
GECE 566 Modeling and Analysis of Electric Drives
3 credits
This course introduces the issues in modeling and analysis of 
electrical drives. Basic concepts of electromechanical energy 
conversion will be presented before the detailed modeling of the 
dynamical aspects of both the DC and AC machines. Dynamic 
behavior of the machines and their computer simulation will be 
examined. Numerical schemes for simulation, singular perturbation 
technique, linearization technique, etc. are parts of the analysis 
tools. In addition, modeling of switching power conversion will 
be studied as it pertains to drive application. If time permits, some 
other practical aspects of drives will be examined, too.
GECE 567 Integration of Renewable Energy  
into Electric Power System
3 credits
This course is designed to provide general technical education in 
all major electricity generating with renewable energy sources 
and their integration in electric power systems. Different types 
of renewable energy resources will be studied for the following 
aspects: the available form, the feature of electricity generation, 
how to integrate into electric power system, and the impact 
on the electric power system, etc. The course also stresses the 
importance of power electronics technology in the process of 
power conditioning and controlling. The decentralized electric 
power system concept will be introduced. The future development 
of renewable energy technologies and the way that power systems 
may evolve to accommodate them will be discussed. 
GECE 568 Power Distribution
3 credits
This course covers the design and analysis of electrical power 
distribution systems, load characteristics, voltage drop calculations, 
single phase transformers, symmetrical and unsymmetrical 
faults, power interruption, voltage regulation, reliability indices, 
distributed generation, power quality issues, grounding, and 
distribution systems protection.
GECE 571 IoT Syst Fundamentals
3 credits
Prerequisite: GECE 502
This course aims to introduce the concept of Internet of Things 
(IoT), to understand the architecture and components of IoT, and 
to address the challenges and solutions of deploying IoT in reality. 
Students will gain hands-on experience assembling and testing 
IoT devices to achieve node to client communication, node to 
node communication, and peer to cloud communication. Students 
will learn how to make design trade-offs between communication 
and computation costs and between hardware and software. In 
addition, cybersecurity is a critical design issue of the IoT system. 
From this course, students will become aware of the cybersecurity 
issues raised by IoT and gain the knowledge of the related security 
techniques.
GECE 572 Digital Signal Processing
3 credits
This course emphasizes the fundamental principles of signal and 
systems, sampling theorem, discrete-time Fourier transform, power 
spectrum, z-transform, discrete Fourier transform (DFT) and the 
FFT algorithm, digital filter design and implementation.
GECE 573 Introduction to Neural Networks
3 credits
Data management, pattern recognition and classification, 
neural networks models, learning schemes, genetic algorithms, 
applications of neural networks.
GECE 574 Artificial Neural Networks
3 credits
Prerequisite: GECE 504
This course will present artificial neural network (ANN) archi-
tectures and computational algorithms suited for practical engi-
neering applications. Topics will include an overview of artificial 
neural networks and neural computing, elementary ANN building 
blocks and models. Concepts of learning and training rules, the 
back-propagation algorithm as well as examples and discussion of 
several classes of ANN such as feed-forward networks, multilayer 
networks, recurrent networks, and self-organizing networks will 
be presented.
GECE 575 DSP System-level Design and Integration
3 credits
Prerequisite: GECE 572
This is a hands-on laboratory-based course with emphasis on 
design and integration of digital signal processing (DSP) systems. 
Industry-standard tools such as NI-LabVIEW, Matlab/Simulink, 
and TI-DSK processor boards will provide the platform to build and 
test systems such as analog-to-digital converters (ADC), sampling 
rate converters, digital FIR and IIR filters, spectrum analyzers. DSP 
implementation and system integration will be emphasized through 
laboratory projects such as dual-tone multi-frequency analysis, 
adaptive noise cancellation, and software-defined radio.
96
GECE 576 IoT Security Implementation
3 credits
This course provides an integrated experience of implementing 
IoT devices in a network with its corresponding web application. 
Topics focus on designing, constructing, and implementing 
embedded controlled devices and know-how in the secure network 
configuration for IoT devices. Single-board-computer/embedded 
hardware platform, relevant router technology will be used to study 
network configuration, potential vulnerabilities/security issues 
associated with device authentication and connection, for example.
GECE 577 Applied Artificial Intelligence
3 credits
Prerequisite: GECE 504
This course will apply artificial intelligence to the design of physical 
systems. Specifically, the course will utilize image processing 
techniques, neural network models, machine training algorithms, 
and deep learning methods to design the systems required to process 
large data sets. The projects assigned in this course will use software 
platforms such as OpenCV Python, Keras, Caffe, and TensorFlow.
GECE 583 Introduction to Communication Systems
3 credits
This course emphasizes Fourier Series/ Transform, frequency 
shifting concepts ideally and in reality. Analog modulation 
techniques and technology including enhancement techniques 
(AM, SSB and FM), sampling theory and digital modulation (PAM, 
PWM, PPM, PCM). Noise considerations in determining best SNR 
technique. Multiplexing and practical examples included. 
GECE 584 Power System Analysis and Control 
3 credits
Basic principles in power system analysis; models for elements of 
power system components, the per unit system, Load flow analysis; 
optimal dispatch of generation; synchronous machine transient 
analysis; balanced faults; symmetrical Components and unbalanced 
faults; stability; power system control.
GECE 585 Wireless System Applications	
3 credits
This course will cover topics in wireless and mobile communications 
and their application to the design of systems and networks. These 
topics will include cellular concepts, beam formation, path loss, 
fading, and multi-path in radio propagation, digital modulation 
formats, equalization, diversity, coding, and multiple access 
techniques. Wireless local area networks (WLAN), global system 
for mobile (GSM), and wideband CDMA (W-CDMA) will be 
discussed.
GECE 586 Computer Communication Networks
3 credits
This course introduces fundamental concepts and theories in data 
and computer communications and networking. Topics include data 
transmission techniques and encoding for data communication, 
networking techniques, circuit and packet switching, and network 
access protocols. 
GECE 587 Wireless Data Communications
3 credits
This course introduces a comprehensive list of topics in the 
emerging field of wireless data communications. Focused on 
upper layer (above the physical layer) protocols and operations 
for wireless data transmission. Topics include wireless cellular 
system infrastructures, wireless circuit data, wireless packet data, 
mobile IP, and packet data in third generation wireless networks. 
Various existing and soon-to-be available wireless data systems 
and technologies are also discussed.
GECE 588 Simulation of Communication Systems
3 credits
Comprehensive course for simulation-based design and analysis 
of communication systems; Focused on the physical layer in 
the context of the OSI-layer model of communication systems, 
topics include modeling of communication systems, performance 
measures and statistical methods for interpretation of simulation 
results, simulation techniques and technology, and case studies.
GECE 590-599 Special Topics in Electrical Engineering 
1-3 credits
Special courses developed from study interest in all areas of 
Electrical Engineering and Embedded Software. Brief description 
of current content to be announced in schedule of classes.
GECE 625 Advanced Control Systems
3 credits
This course treats the analysis and design of linear control 
systems from the point view of state space representations. 
Topics will include system modeling, coordinate transformation, 
controllability, observability, output feedback, state feedback, 
linear quadratic regulators, and linear estimators. Additionally, 
an introduction to nonlinear control is presented with the topics 
of feedback linearization and adaptive control. Applications from 
interdisciplinary current state-of-art systems will be presented. 
GECE 626 Advanced Control Technologies
3 credits
This course emphasizes the applications of advanced control 
technologies. The advanced control technologies covered in this 
course include active disturbance rejection control, reduced-order 
active disturbance rejection control, discrete active disturbance 
rejection control, and discrete time optimal control. Applications 
include motor control, power systems, chemical processes, and 
micro-electro-mechanical systems.
97
Engineering Management
GECE 671 Design of Electrical Machinery
3 credits
A design-oriented course which emphasizes realistic characteristics 
and specifications applicable to AC and DC motors and generators 
leading to an individual design project.
GECE 672 Digital Image Processing
3 credits
Prerequisite: GECE 572
This course presents strategies to process digital image data. Topics 
covered will include the representation and perception of images, 
the use of operations in the spatial and spatial-frequency domains 
to segment, enhance, filter, and restore digital images as well as 
transformations of images for multi-resolution analysis. Algorithms 
will be implemented and evaluated in Matlab/Simulink.
GECE 673 Control of AC Drives
3 credits
This course introduces the concept of AC drives. Various types 
of converters and inverters suitable for AC drives and the related 
control issues are presented and studied. The modeling and 
dynamical aspects of AC machines will be examined prior to the 
detailed discussion of the control issues and techniques such as 
vector control and field orientation, etc.
GECE 680 Digital Communication
3 credits
This is a graduate course in the analysis of digital communication 
systems. Methods to understand and analyze digitally modulated 
signals are presented. Optimum receiver designs, synchronization 
issues, and coding strategies for different channel models are 
developed. Communications over fading, multipath and band-
limited channels is studied using Code Division Multiple Access 
(CDMA) schemes and Spread Spectrum (SS) approaches.
GECE 681 Optical Devices and Systems
3 credits
This course is an introduction to electroptics. This includes wave 
propagation, interaction with both iso and anisotropic materials, 
modulation techniques, lenses and lens systems and optical sources 
and detectors. Subsystems are considered initially but typical 
optical systems and applications are considered. 
GECE 690-699 Special Topics in Electrical Engineering
1-3 credits
Special courses developed from study interest in all areas of 
Electrical Engineering or Embedded Software. Brief description of 
current content to be announced in schedule of classes. Graduate 
courses in the 600 series are open to graduate students only.
* Please see course description in the Embedded Software 
Engineering Option
Engineering 
Management
Director: David Gee, Ph.D.
INTRODUCTION
The graduate program in Engineering Management is designed to 
provide advanced studies for the graduate engineer who wishes to 
continue preparation in the profession as an engineering manager or 
project director/leader. The program provides continuing education 
in advanced engineering and business/management subjects for the 
working engineer who acknowledges the need to stay abreast of 
the rapidly changing technological and business world. Emphasis 
is placed on the development of the engineer’s capacity for 
independent study and continued professional growth.
Students in the program accrue multiple benefits including 
enhanced technical knowledge together with a firm understanding 
of the business aspects in which a company must master. Required 
core engineering courses include project management, risk 
management, and reliability. Required core business courses 
include the technological environment of business and staples from 
business administration and/or business analytics. After completing 
the program, students will have gained new insight including how 
management perceives engineers. Your new expertise will provide 
a boost to your technical abilities as well as to enhance your skills 
as an effective leader and decision maker.
DEGREE OFFERED
The Master of Science in Engineering Management is administered 
by the department of Mechanical Engineering within the College 
of Engineering and Business.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1.	 Applicants must have earned a Bachelor’s degree in Engineering 
from an ABET-accredited program or its equivalent, with a GPA 
of 2.5 or better.
2.	 Applicants without the appropriate engineering degree may 
be admitted and required to take additional course work as 
determined by the program director.
3.	 Applicants must submit the following:
	
•		 Completed application
	
•		 Transcripts for all prior college coursework
	
•		 Three recommendation letters
	
•		 TOEFL/other scores if English is not the first language.
98
CURRICULUM
The student will be assigned an initial academic advisor. The 
advisor and the student will select appropriate courses to satisfy 
the program’s degree objectives and will obtain approval for the 
curriculum through the academic approval process. The candidate 
must maintain a 3.0 GPA to continue for the degree in the program.
A total of 30 credits will be required, including three core courses 
(9 credits) from business, four core courses (12 credits) from 
engineering, and three elective courses (9 credits). 
Required Courses – Business: 3 courses (9 credits) including:
GMBA 610		 	 Business Analytics
Select two courses from the Business Administration (MBA) – 
Online program or Business Administration (MBA) – Business 
Analytics program.
Visit the graduate catalog for Business Administration (MBA) to 
view GMBA course options. Many of these courses have Peregrine 
Academic Leveling Course (ALC) material prerequisites. Any ALC 
prerequisite must be completed before starting the GMBA course. 
Note, ALC Foundations of Quantitative Research Techniques 
and Statistics (QUANT) will be automatically satisfied for Eng. 
Mgmt students.
Required Courses – Engineering: 4 courses (12 credits) from 
the list below:
GENG 621	
Reliability Engineering 
GENG 622	
Risk Management
GENG 623	
Decision Making Under Uncertainty
GENG 624	
Project Management
Elective Courses: Upon approval by their academic advisor, 
select 3 courses (9 credits) from among the following disciplines:
Engineering – GENG, GME, GBME, GENV, GECE, GCYSEC, 
GCIS 6xx level course, GMBA 
Five-Year Accelerated B.S./M.S.
The five-year Bachelor of Science/Master of Science degree 
in Engineering Management is designed to allow outstanding 
undergraduate students the opportunity to earn both an undergraduate 
and a graduate degree within five years. Admission into the 
accelerated Five-Year B.S./M.S. program will be based on several 
factors, including past academic performance and considerations 
of overall aptitude and maturity. Students in the second semester of 
their junior year (or one semester before reaching senior standing) 
with a minimum 3.0 cumulative GPA, can apply for this program. 
Students accepted into this program should plan to complete 
specific first-year graduate courses during the senior year, and in the 
following summer term, with completion of all degree requirements 
in the following academic year. Students admitted to the five-year 
B.S./M.S. program may apply up to 6 graduate credits towards 
completing the B.S. degree.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GENG 621 Reliability Engineering
3 credits
Reliability modeling, prediction, testing, physics to failure, and 
reliability design techniques are studied. Hardware and software 
systems. Identification of weak link for reliability improvement. 
Quality system reliability using advanced testing methods.
GENG 622 Risk Management
3 credits
Introduction to project risks management and engineering ethics 
for engineering decision making. Integrated models for technical, 
schedule, and cost risks. Management of cost-risk contributions. 
Identification and control of critical paths for the project schedule. 
Implementation of integrated risk management with computer 
simulation methods.
GENG 623 Decision Making Under Uncertainty
3 credits
Introduction of general techniques for dealing systematically with 
uncertainty in engineering decision problems. Computer simulation 
models, sensitivity analysis, and subjective probability assessment 
for engineering judgment. Probabilistic design criteria, the value of 
information, utility analysis with risk aversion, and trade-off under 
uncertainty are studied.
GENG 624 Project Management
3 credits
The course will cover the skills necessary to manage large and 
small projects in terms of planning and controlling techniques, 
coordinating and directing techniques, and negotiating techniques. 
Roles and responsibilities of the project manager and tools and 
techniques used in managing projects will be discussed along with 
preparing project records and reports.
All GME courses are listed under the Mechanical Engineering 
section of this catalog.
For all other engineering courses, please visit the appropriate 
departmental section of this catalog.
All GMBA courses are listed under the Business Administration 
section of the catalog.
99
Mechanical Engineering
Mechanical 
Engineering
Director: David Gee, Ph.D.
INTRODUCTION
The graduate program in Mechanical Engineering is designed to 
provide advanced studies for the graduate engineer who wishes 
to continue preparation for effective participation mechanical 
engineering profession. The program also provides continuing 
education in advanced subjects for the working engineer who 
acknowledges the need to stay abreast of the rapidly changing 
technological world. Emphasis is placed on the development 
of the engineer’s capacity for independent study and continued 
professional growth.
DEGREE OFFERED
The program offers a Master of Science in Mechanical Engineering 
degree.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1.	 Applicants must have earned a Bachelor’s degree in Mechanical 
Engineering from an ABET accredited program or its equivalent 
with a QPA of 2.5 or better.
2.	 Applicants without the appropriate Mechanical Engineering 
degree may be admitted and required to take additional course 
work as determined by the program director.
3.	 Applicants must submit the following:
	
•		 Completed application
	
•		 Transcripts for all prior college coursework
	
•		 Three recommendation letters
	
•		 TOEFL/other scores if English is not a first language.
CURRICULUM
The student will be assigned an initial academic advisor. The 
advisor and the student will select appropriate courses to satisfy 
the programs degree objectives and will obtain approval for the 
curriculum through the academic approval sequence. Within the 
first two academic semesters, students must take the following 
two courses:
GME 565	
Computer Assisted Engineering
GENG 603	
Engineering Analysis 1
NOTE: A student may replace GENG 603 Engineering Analysis 1 
with another approved GME or GENG course by passing an exam 
conducted during the first week of class. The exam time will be 
announced at the first GENG 603 class.
After the student has completed 12 credits of study, the student 
will be assessed relative to their preparedness to begin thesis or 
project work. The candidate must maintain a 3.0 GPA to continue 
in the program. The candidate must then choose one of the three 
project/thesis plans below for completion of their degree; an advisor 
will be assigned to guide the candidate for the completion of the 
degree work.
The advisor (thesis or project) will recommend a program of study 
and advise the student regarding the thesis/project subject, act as the 
academic advisor, and determine when to recommend the student 
for final examination, at which time this recommendation will be 
transmitted for approval through the academic approval sequence.
Plan A (Thesis)
The student will be required to submit a six-credit thesis as part 
of the 30 credits of graduate course work and pass a final oral 
examination on the thesis material and related subjects. The thesis 
work must be approved by the academic approval sequence prior 
to the commencement of the research work. The thesis advisor 
will direct the student’s work and determine when to recommend 
the manuscript for review by a faculty committee. The review 
committee will be appointed by the usual academic approval 
sequence and will consist of three full-time Gannon Mechanical 
Engineering faculty members familiar with the subject material. 
In some cases, one committee member may be from outside the 
Mechanical Engineering Department. The advisor will be the chair 
of the review committee.
Plan B (Project)
The student will be required to complete a design project and to pass 
a final oral examination covering the student’s project and related 
subject areas. The project will be worth three graduate credits as part 
of the 30 credits of graduate work. The project must be approved by 
the usual academic approval sequence prior to the commencement 
of the project work. The project advisor will direct the student’s 
work and determine when to recommend the manuscript for review 
by a faculty committee. The review committee will be appointed by 
the usual academic approval sequence and will consist of three full-
time Gannon Mechanical Engineering faculty members familiar 
with the subject material. In some cases, one committee member 
may be from outside of the Mechanical Engineering Department. 
The advisor will be the chair of the review committee.
Plan C (Project Course)
The student will be required to complete a three-credit course 
designated as a project course as part of the 30 credits of graduate 
work. The project course will be approved by the usual academic 
approval sequence prior to the commencement of the course and 
must include a significant project for its completion. The course 
instructor will inform the student of the complete requirements for 
the project course and be responsible for seeing that they satisfy 
these requirements.
100
Professional Track (Work-Study Program)
The objective of the professional track is to present an academic 
program combined with application training on actual industrial 
problems to give students a targeted education, complemented by 
hands-on, real-world development exposure. Students are selected 
for this track based on academic background, leadership skills, and 
communications skills. The student is assigned a Gannon professor 
as a mentor while working at the industrial site. The mentor 
advises the student on his academic work and guides the student on 
industrial engineering projects. The projects are carefully chosen to 
reinforce classroom work and to develop students into outstanding 
engineers. In addition to the mentorship in technical areas, the 
professor also mentors the student in leadership skills, work and 
personal ethics, and communication skills that are needed in the 
industrial workplace. The student is also assigned an engineering 
mentor from the industrial sponsor. This track requires that the 
student work on these projects half-time during the school year 
and full-time during the summer. The number of students in this 
track is dependent on the availability of industrial sponsorship. 
Mechanical Engineering Curriculum  
with Professional Track
The curriculum and internship training for Mechanical Engineering 
with the professional track is as follows:
Fall First Semester
Engineering Analysis 1
Two Mechanical Engineering Graduate Courses
CPT
Spring Second Semester
Engineering Analysis 2 
Three Mechanical Engineering Graduate Courses
CPT
Summer	
Curricular Practical Training
Fall Third Semester
Three Mechanical Engineering Graduate Courses
CPT
Spring Fourth Semester
Two Mechanical Engineering Graduate Courses
One Free Elective with Advisor’s Approval 
CPT
Five-Year Accelerated B.S./M.S.
The Five-Year Bachelor of Science/Master of Science degree 
in Mechanical Engineering is designed to allow outstanding 
undergraduate students the opportunity to earn both an undergraduate 
and a graduate degree within five years. Admission into the 
accelerated Five-Year B.S./M.S. program will be based on several 
factors, including past academic performance, and considerations 
of overall aptitude and maturity. Students in the second semester of 
their junior year (or one semester before reaching senior standing) 
with a minimum 3.0 cumulative GPA are eligible to apply for 
this program. Students accepted into this program should plan to 
complete specific first-year graduate courses during the senior year, 
and in the following summer term, with completion of all degree 
requirements in the following academic year. Students admitted 
to the Five-Year B.S./M.S. program may apply up to 6 graduate 
credits towards completion of the B.S. degree.
Five-year Accelerated B.S. in Industrial and Robotics 
Engineering (IRE)/ M.S. in Mechanical Engineering (ME)
The five-year IRE Bachelor of Science/ME Master of Science 
degree is designed to allow outstanding undergraduate students 
the opportunity to earn both an undergraduate and a graduate 
degree. The programs may be completed in five years of full-time 
study (includes one summer). Students in the first semester of their 
sophomore year with a minimum 3.0 cumulative GPA can apply 
for this program. The students accepted into this program should 
plan to complete specific propaedeutic courses in Mechanical 
Engineering (12 credits) during their undergraduate period. 6 credits 
can be counted as Technical Electives for IRE. A set of Liberal 
Studies courses are required during the summer after their junior 
year. A set of first year graduate courses will be taken during the 
senior year. No more than 7 graduate credits are allowed prior to 
the completion of the B.S. degree.
Five-year Accelerated B.S. in Biomedical Engineering  
(BME)/ M.S. in Mechanical Engineering (ME)
The five-year BME Bachelor of Science/ME Master of Science 
degree is designed to allow outstanding undergraduate students 
the opportunity to earn both an undergraduate and a graduate 
degree. The programs may be completed in five years of full time 
study (includes one summer). Students in the first semester of their 
junior year with a minimum 3.0 cumulative GPA can apply for this 
program. The students accepted into this program should plan to 
complete specific propaedeutic courses in Mechanical Engineering 
during their second semester of junior year and a set of Liberal 
Studies courses during the summer after their junior year. A set of 
first year graduate courses will be taken during the senior year. No 
more than 7 graduate credits are allowed prior to the completion 
of the B.S. degree.
CO-OP Track
The objective of the CO-OP track is to present an academic 
program combined with application training on actual industrial 
problems in engineering environments. This is to give students a 
targeted education on real-world problems. Students may join this 
program after completing sufficient coursework to be successful 
in an industrial environment and receiving approved industrial 
sponsorship. International students participating in a CO-OP are 
required to contact the Office of Global Support and Student 
Engagement to apply for Curricular Practical Training before 
engaging in any CO-OP activity.
101
Mechanical Engineering
Students accepted to the CO-OP track are assigned a Gannon 
professor as a mentor and must take the Graduate Professional 
Experience (GENG 700-series) course each semester they are 
enrolled in the program.
Students must complete 30 credits of graduate course work in 
addition to their Graduate Professional Experience courses. 
Students must maintain a cumulative grade point average of at least 
3.0 for the duration of their master’s degree program and fulfill all 
other requirements for their degree.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GENG 588 Modern Control Theory 
3 credits
Linear spaces and operators, mathematical descriptions of systems. 
Linear dynamical systems and impulse response; matrices. 
Controllability and observability of linear dynamical systems. 
Irreducible realizations of rational transfer function matrices. 
Canonical forms, state feedback and state estimators. Stability 
of linear systems. Composite systems; linear optimal control and 
linear distributed systems.
GENG 589 Digital Control
3 credits
This course deals with the control of dynamic systems by employing 
classical and model control tools incorporating a digital computer 
in the control loop. It provides the background needed for those 
practicing engineers who have studied the concepts of continuous-
time control to enhance their knowledge in the area of digital 
control system. Topics of discussion are z-transform, digital control 
system design, filters design, state-space approach to control system 
design, etc.
GENG 603 Engineering Analysis 1 
3 credits
The theory and application to engineering problems of matrix-
vector methods and Matlab software. Transition from discrete to 
distributed parameter systems with introduction to finite elements 
and partial differential equations. 
GENG 609 Nonlinear Analysis 
3 credits
Introduction to the understanding of nonlinear characteristics 
of mechanical and electrical components and systems. Basic 
analytical, graphical, and numerical methods are presented. 
Introduction to chaotic dynamics and nonlinear control.
GENG 621 Reliability Engineering 
3 credits
Reliability modeling, prediction, testing, physics to failure, and 
reliability design techniques are studied. Hardware and software 
systems. Identification of weak link for reliability improvement. 
Quality system reliability using advanced testing methods.
GENG 622 Risk Management 
3 credits
Introduction to project risks management and engineering ethics 
for engineering decision making. Integrated models for technical, 
schedule, and cost risks. Management of cost-risk contributions. 
Identification and control of critical paths for project schedule. 
Implementation of integrated risk management with computer 
simulation methods.
GENG 623 Decision Making under Uncertainty 
3 credits
Introduction of general techniques for dealing systematically with 
uncertainty in engineering decision problems. Computer simulation 
models, sensitivity analysis, and subjective probability assessment 
for engineering judgment. Probabilistic design criteria, value of 
information, utility analysis with risk aversion, and trade-off under 
uncertainty are studied.
GENG 624 Project Management 
3 credits
The course will cover the skills necessary to manage large and 
small projects in terms of planning and controlling techniques, 
coordinating and directing techniques, and negotiating techniques. 
Roles and responsibilities of the project manager and tools and 
techniques used in managing projects will be discussed along with 
preparing project records and reports.
GENG 685 Advanced Control Systems 
3 credits
This course treats the analysis and design of linear control 
systems from the point of view of state space representation. 
Topics include system modeling, coordinate transformation, 
controllability, observability, output feedback, state feedback, 
linear quadratic regulators, and linear estimators. Additionally, 
an introduction to nonlinear control is presented with the topics 
of feedback linearization and adaptive control. Applications 
from interdisciplinary current state-of-of-the-art systems will 
be presented.	
GENG 689 Stability Analysis of Multidimensional  
Dynamic System
3 credits
Fundamental concepts of stability for various classes of dynamic 
systems are examined and discussed. The systems considered 
include multidimensional lumped-parameter systems that can 
be described by linear differential equations. The systems under 
consideration are divided into certain well-defined classes, 
and various phenomena related to vibrations and stability of 
these systems are exposed systematically. Although the course 
examples are drawn from mechanical systems, the general nature 
of formulation can be applied to systems of similar nature in other 
disciplines, such as electrical circuits.
102
GENG 700-702 Graduate Professional Experience
1 credit
Prerequisite: Discipline-specific industrial sponsorship
This course complements regular academic education with 
hands-on, real-world development exposure. Students are 
required to be engaged in practical training during the course. 
International students require Curricular Practical Training 
(CPT) approval. Topics include issues facing engineering and 
computing professionals, trends in the fields, job prospects, team 
and workplace behavior, project leadership as well as reviews of 
speaking, listening, reading and writing skills.
GENG 703 Engineering Analysis 2
3 credits
Solving engineering problems using ordinary differential equations, 
partial differential equation, series solutions to differential 
equations. Complex analysis applied to engineering problems.
GENG 796 Directed Research Project
3 credits
Those students choosing their research project option will complete 
a directed research project. The topic will be approved by a three-
member board consisting of the candidate’s major professor, 
the department chairperson, and the Director of the Graduate 
Engineering Program. The student will perform the literature 
search, complete the project, and submit a final report.
GENG 797 Thesis
3-6 credits
Those students choosing the thesis option will have their topic 
approved by a three-member board consisting of the candidate’s 
major professor, the department chairperson, and the Director of 
the Graduate Engineering Program. The student will perform the 
literature search, complete the thesis, and submit a final report. 
Under this option, students must complete a total of 6 Thesis credits. 
GME 505 Finite Element Method 1 
3 credits
Fundamentals of matrix algebra; basic approach to finite 
element analysis; definitions and basic concepts; system 
analysis fundamentals of elasticity; element formation by direct 
displacement method; element formulation by Galerkin Criterion 
(weight residuals method); finite element workshop using finite 
element program, such as ANSYS, for design and analysis of 
some structures.
GME 507 Optimization in Engineering 
3 credits
Basic theory, concepts and methods of engineering optimization. 
Primary techniques from both classical and modern optimizations 
applied to engineering decision-making.
GME 510 Thermal Systems Design
3 credits
This course reviews the fundamentals of thermal systems design 
and optimization. Basic consideration in thermal systems design 
will be discussed. General approach to system analysis, modeling, 
simulation and optimization will be introduced. Various optimiza-
tion techniques and methods will also be presented and discussed.
GME 511 Alternative Energy Systems
3 credits
Various alternative energy systems are introduced, their operation 
discussed and their performance evaluated.
GME 512 Application of CFD
3 credits
Topics include finite-difference and finite volume methods; 
satisfaction of boundary and initial conditions. Application of 
numerical techniques to satisfy conservation principles including 
mass, momentum, and energy. Modern CFD software will be used 
to analyze various applied fluid flow problems.
GME 524 Turbomachinery Design
3 credits
Application of general principles of fluid mechanics to fluid 
machinery design. Design principles of centrifugal and axial 
compressors, degree of reaction estimates, blade design, state 
performance calculations, axial flow turbines. Design calculations 
of blade stress, disc stresses, and thermal stresses.
GME 525 Advanced Fluid Mechanics 
3 credits
Velocity distributions in laminar and turbulent flow. Equations of 
state and interphase transports in isothermal systems. Compressible 
flow. Isentropic flow. Shock and expansion waves. Frictional 
effects. Flow with heat consideration. Numerical analysis.
GME 526 Advanced Thermodynamics 
3 credits
Recapitulations of first and second laws of thermodynamics 
and their application to more generalized engineering systems. 
Chemical engineering thermodynamics; partial molar properties, 
chemical potential and its application to multiphase and 
multispecies systems. Statistical thermodynamics. Introduction to 
irreversible thermodynamics. 
103
Mechanical Engineering
GME 527 Internal Combustion Engines 
3 credits
This course introduces and reviews the fundamentals of internal 
combustion engines, including spark-ignition and compression-
ignition engines. General engine systems and working cycles are 
described. Engine thermodynamics, gas exchange and combustion 
processes, engine fluid flow and heat transfer, and fuel injection 
systems are analyzed. The course also reviews the formation of 
engine exhaust emissions and methods for controlling the emissions 
of the internal combustion engines. Engine design and consideration 
of the effects of design and operating factors are introduced.
GME 528 Heat Exchanger Design 
3 credits
Application of general principles of heat transfer in design of heat 
exchanges. Different types of heat exchangers will be studied in 
design-oriented projects.
GME 530 Advanced Strength of Materials 
3 credits
Special topics on the strength and stiffness of members subjected 
to static loads; beams on elastic foundations; thin plates and 
shell contact stress; curved flexural members, energy methods; 
instability-buckling loads; plasticity; ultimate load analysis.
GME 535 Elastomer Design
3 credits
This course is designed to introduce students to the important field 
of polymer science with a focus on thermoplastics and elastomers. 
The course will be focused on the fundamentals of elastomer 
selection, mechanical properties of elastomers, and design of 
elastomeric components including hyperelastic modeling.
GME 555 Computer Aided Manufacturing 
3 credits
Introduction of basic concepts of automation in manufacturing 
with principles of NC systems and computer-managed manufac-
turing. 	
GME 563 Machine Dynamics 
3 credits
Introduction to basic machine dynamics. Analysis of forces in 
translating rotating and reciprocating systems. Flywheel analysis, 
regulators, balancing, gyroscopic forces in machines.
GME 564 Thermal Environmental Design
3 credits
The relevant principles of engineering thermodynamics, heat 
transfer and fluid mechanics will be reviewed. Refrigeration and 
cryogenics will be covered. Thermodynamic properties of moist 
air will be reviewed along with various applications in heating, 
ventilating and air conditioning. Human thermal comfort and indoor 
air quality will be covered and various methods of heating and 
cooling load calculations for buildings will be presented.
GME 565 Computer Assisted Engineering 
3 credits
Topics include the application of Matlab software to multi 
component mechanical and thermal/fluid system design, analysis 
and synthesis, static and transient systems. Mathematical techniques 
include nonlinear equation solution, non-dimensional analysis, 
lumped vs. distributed models, optimization and design sensitivity 
analysis, probability and statistics, and Monte Carlo simulation. 
Examples are taken from industrial mechanical engineering 
problems of current interest.
	
	
GME 567 Lubrication System Design 
3 credits
Analytical and experimental results in lubrications of journal 
bearings and utilization of this information in design projects.
GME 583 Polymer Engineering
3 credits
Prerequisite: Background in general chemistry and material science 
as undergraduate
This course is designed to introduce graduate engineering students 
to the important field of polymer science. The course will be 
focused on the fundamentals of polymer science. Since polymers 
are ubiquitous in modern society, a background in this subject is 
essential for engineers who wish to pursue careers in industry.
GME 589 Nanotechnology for Engineers
3 credits
Prerequisite: Background in general chemistry and material science 
as undergraduate
This course is designed to introduce graduate engineering students 
to the important field of nanotechnology. The course will be focused 
on the fundamentals of nanomaterials (i.e. synthesis, characteriza-
tion, properties and applications). Since nanotechnology is a field 
with incredible promise to change the future of society in almost 
every facet, a background in this subject is essential for engineers 
who wish to pursue careers in industry.
GME 590-599 Special Topics in Engineering
3 credits 
Special courses developed from study interest in all areas of 
Engineering. Brief description of current content to be announced 
in schedule of classes. 
GME 605 Finite Element Method 2 
3 credits
Prerequisite: GME 505 or equivalent course/experience
Variational methods of element formulation (virtual work, potential 
energy, complementary energy, discretion, and hybrid approach); 
variational principles in global analysis, representation of element 
behavior functions and geometry (requirements, polynomials, shape 
functions different elements including higher order elements); finite 
element programming ideas and simple routings.
104
GME 612 Distributed Parameter Systems
3 credits
Modeling and analysis of bounded engineering systems distributed 
over space and time. Application of partial differential equation 
models and transition to infinite dimension representations. 
Analytical exact and approximate solutions are combined with 
numerical results. Examples are taken from areas of current interest 
in the fields of acoustics, mechanics, structural dynamics, heat 
transfer, fluid flow, kinematic waves, and nano systems.
GME 615 Acoustics and Noise Control 
3 credits
Introduction to acoustics with a focus on noise control. The 
course provides the fundamentals of noise radiation, transmission, 
measurement, and control. Additionally, the course covers the 
fundamental principles and application of noise control materials 
and systems. Examples from actual noise control problems will be 
used throughout the course.
GME 625 Convection Heat Transfer 
3 credits
Review of equations of change, equations of state, and constitutive 
and governing equations; forced convection heat transfer in laminar 
internal flows; forced convection heat transfer in turbulent internal 
flows; forced convection heat transfer in turbulent external flows; 
condensation; boiling.
GME 628: Fundamentals and Applications of Combustion
3 credits 
This course studies the fundamentals of combustion and their 
applications to combustion systems such as combustion engines. 
Review of fundamentals of combustion thermochemistry and chem-
ical kinetics, mass transfer and reacting flow, laminar premixed 
and diffusion flames, droplet burning, turbulent premixed and 
non-premixed flames, detonations, and formation of combustion 
emissions. The combustion engines analyzed for combustion and 
emissions formation and control include general internal combus-
tion and gas turbine engines. 
GME 629 Continuum Mechanics 
3 credits
Study of continuum media. Tensor analysis, kinematics of defor-
mation, elastic response, isotropic and anisotropic elasticity, finite 
deformations, viscoelasticity.
GME 630 Computational Fluid Dynamics
3 credits
This is an introductory course in computational fluid dynamics 
(CFD). The course reviews the fundamental conservation principles 
and governing equations of fluid mechanics. Numerical methods 
and computational techniques and skills required for analyzing and 
solving the fluid mechanics governing equations are introduced. 
Application of the methods to practical fluid dynamics problems 
is presented and discussed. Available CFD application codes are 
also introduced. In addition, the fundamentals of computational 
heat transfer are presented.
GME 635 Structural Dynamics
3 credits
Dynamics of structures including beams, plates, and mixed systems 
of beams, plates, and lumped masses/springs. Energy methods. 
Exact and approximate solutions for system natural frequencies 
and mode shapes. Effect of damping. Response to applied forces.
GME 641 Elasticity 
3 credits
Equations of linear elasticity; techniques for solution: Airy’s stress 
function; polar coordinates; numerical methods; thermal stress.	
GME 643 Plasticity
3 credits
Plasticity as applied to engineering. Stress-strain relation both in 
elastic and plastic medium. Yielding, deformation energy and creep. 
Limit analysis and its application in design.
	
	
GME 645 Plates and Shells 
3 credits
Properties, theory, and method of analysis of plates and shells. 
Problems related to rectangular, circular and annular plates, 
buckling; energy methods, thin shells, dynamic analysis vibration.
GME 646 Advanced Machine Design 
3 credits
A design-project based course. This course enhances student’s 
machine design experience. The course demonstrates to the 
student how knowledge from other engineering disciplines can be 
integrated in the accomplishment of a design objective. At the same 
time, the student will get acquainted with design methodology and 
developing the design strategy.
GME 648 Modeling and Simulation of Dynamic Systems 
3 credits
This course presents mathematical modeling methods for multi-
physics physical systems containing mechanical, electrical, 
thermal-fluid, actuators, and control components. Included are 
the application of physical principles, energy approaches, non-
dimensional techniques, and discretization of continuous systems. 
Numerical simulation of linear and nonlinear models will be studied 
and compared to experimental results.
GME 650 Robotics 
3 credits
Introduction of basic concepts and robotic systems with principles 
of kinematics, dynamics control and economics, to familiarize the 
student with the basics and industrial applications.
105
Environmental Science and Engineering (ESE)
GME 655 Advanced Dynamic Systems 
3 credits
Energy considerations and development of Lagrange’s method for 
multi-element dynamic systems. Applications for deriving system 
differential equations. Dynamics of electromechanical and electro-
hydraulic systems. Examples of current interest will be studied.
GME 657 Active Suspension Systems 
3 credits
Modeling and analysis of suspension systems for ground vehicles 
and aircraft. Response to various types of inputs. Applications 
of control theory. Analysis and design of active and semi-active 
components and systems.
GME 661 Advanced Mechanical Vibrations 
3 credits
Advanced topics related to vibration of multi-dimensional and 
continuous parameter systems are examined and discussed. The 
course includes vibration analysis of various types of continuous 
parameter homogeneous and forced systems. It further includes 
methods of converting continuous parameter systems to discrete 
multi-dimensional systems. Additionally, concepts of vibration 
design including active suppression are investigated. Finally, 
vibration testing methods are discussed.
GME 670 Mechanics of Composites
3 credits 
An introduction to the mechanics composite materials, specifically 
fiber-reinforced plastics (FRP). The course will focus on the 
macroscopic properties of laminated structures formed from FRP, 
including strength, stiffness, thermal and hygrothermal properties, 
and theories of failure. The course will present the classical 
lamination theory, with extensions to the theory as time permits.
GME 680 Design of Experiments 
3 credits
Review of Visual Basic and MINITAB; application of Monte Carlo 
software for Six Sigma Design: simple comparative experiments; 
experiments with single factor; the analysis of variance; randomized 
blocks, Latin squares, and related designs; factorial design; two and 
higher level fractional factorial designs.
GME 690-699 Special Topics in Engineering
3 credits
Special courses developed from study interest in all areas of 
Engineering. Brief description of current content to be announced 
in schedule of classes. Open to graduate students only.
Environmental 
Science and 
Engineering (ESE)
Program Director: Varun Kasaraneni, Ph.D., PE
Master of Science in 
Environmental Science 
and Management
The program in Environmental Science and Management is 
diverse and dynamic, focusing on challenges in both the outdoor 
and built environment. The Department of Environmental Science 
and Engineering draws upon established relationships with local 
industries and environmental agencies making Gannon University 
a regional leader in environmental quality, environmental health, 
and environmental management. 
Two options are offered within the M.S. program: 1.) Environmental 
Health and Safety and 2.) Environmental Management. Graduates 
of the Environmental Health and Safety option have the ability to 
develop and implement technologies to improve and protect both 
environmental and human health. Many graduates are employed in 
areas of environmental compliance in the industry, consulting firms 
or the government. Students whose career plans are management 
and administrative in nature may pursue the Environmental 
Management option. This option combines environmental science 
courses with business courses in order to prepare students for 
environmental leadership roles.
PROGRAM OBJECTIVES  
AND LEARNING OUTCOMES
The department has developed the following learning outcomes 
and an assessment process, to provide feedback for continuous 
improvement in the program. Graduates of the Environmental 
Science and Management program should demonstrate:
1.	 knowledge of environmental health, science, and engineering 
fundamentals relevant to the areas of air, water, land, and soil; 
2.	 capability to design an environmental research study, collect 
and analyze data, and communicate the results; 
3.	 understanding of environmental regulations and the roles of 
public and private organizations in environmental regulatory 
compliance; 
4.	 the ability to communicate effectively and function as a member 
on multi-disciplinary teams;
5.	 knowledge of contemporary environmental issues on a local 
and global scale; and
6.	 contributions, such as service, to the profession and/or commu-
nity.
106
EMPLOYMENT OUTLOOK
The application of environmental science is felt in essentially 
every walk of life, including agriculture, manufacturing, mining, 
water/wastewater treatment, land reclamation, and recreation. 
Opportunities for employment include not only government and 
non-profit agencies but private corporations need professionals to 
manage their in-house programs.
ADMISSIONS CRITERIA
Students should have a Bachelor’s degree in science or engineering 
from an accredited college or university, with courses in math, 
biology (preferably including ecology and microbiology), chemistry, 
physics, and earth sciences. If an applicant’s undergraduate science 
and math preparation are not adequate, appropriate undergraduate 
courses may be required in addition to the graduate program. If 
the applicant’s undergraduate grade point average is less than 3.0 
(4 point scale), the Graduate Record Exam (GRE) is required as 
part of the application package. 
MASTER OF SCIENCE IN 
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE AND 
MANAGEMENT CURRICULUM
A minimum of 30 credits are required for the M.S. degree; num-
ber of credits per course is indicated. The student and advisor 
determine each student’s program to meet the student’s individual 
career needs.
Requirements for the  
Option in Environmental Health and Safety
GENV 500	
Environmental Research Methods	
3
GENV 503	
Principles of Environmental  
Science and Engineering	
3
GENV 536/7	 Environmental Chemistry/Lab	
4
GENV 542	
Environmental Toxicology	
3
GENV 544	
Environmental Law and Regulations	
3
GENV 694	
Thesis	
6
or
GENV 695	
Research Paper or Project	
3
Additional electives approved by the program director to satisfy 
the program requirements of 30 credits.
Option in Environmental Management
The role of the environmental manager has evolved rapidly since 
the enactment of sweeping environmental legislation of the early 
1970s and the need for environmental professionals continues to 
this day. Proper environmental stewardship can lead to greater 
competitiveness and profitability and is required under numerous 
federal regulations. The need for individuals who understand 
business and management principles, and who also have a thorough 
understanding of environmental science and technology is in 
high demand. 
Objectives
•	 an understanding of current concepts in the science and 
technology of pollution management and the remediation of 
contaminated sites, and of the role of pollution prevention and 
minimization in the manufacturing and service sectors;
•	 knowledge of the health effects of pollution, and the strategies 
employed to promote a safe and healthy workplace;
•	 an understanding of business and management issues and 
strategies;
•	 the ability to apply scientific methods to define problems, gather 
relevant information and analyze research results.
Requirements for the option in Environmental Management 
(30 credits)
Environmental Science Courses (18 credits)
GENV 503	
Principles of Environmental Science  
and Engineering
GENV 542	
Environmental Toxicology
GENV 544	
Environmental Law and Regulations 
GENV  
540/549	
Industrial Health I or Industrial Safety
GENV 695	
Research Paper or Project
GENV	
Elective 	
3 credits
Management Courses from the following GMBA courses 
(12-credits)
GMBA610 	
Business Analytics
GMBA611	
Organizational Design& Leadership
GMBA612 	
Database Design & SQL
GMBA620 	
Data Analytics for Accounting
GMBA621 	
Predictive Analytics & Data Mining
GMBA622 	
Marketing Analytics
GMBA623 	
Operations & Technology Mgmt
GMBA634 	
Data Visualization for Business
GMBA635 	
Financial Management & Modeling
Five-Year Accelerated B.S./M.S.
The Five-Year Program offered through the department is designed 
to allow environmental engineering and environmental science 
majors to graduate with both a B.S. and M.S. degree in five years. 
Eligibility for the program is competitive and admission is based 
on overall academic performance and scientific/math aptitude. 
Students must apply for the combined B.S/M.S. program during 
their junior year. In addition to the B.S. requirements, students 
complete six credits at the graduate level during their senior year. 
In order to receive graduate credit for courses taken during the 
fourth year, students must have applied and been accepted into 
the B.S./M.S. program. 
107
Environmental Science and Engineering (ESE)
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Senior undergraduate students may be admitted to 500-level courses 
only if formally enrolled in the Combined 5 Year BS/MS program.
GENV 500 Environmental Research Methods
3 credits
Students will become familiar with the scientific method and the 
scientific literature, and will be prepared to plan a scientific research 
study, including a statement of experimental goals, a review of 
the scientific literature, and a presentation of methods. Offered: 
Fall Semester
GENV 503 Principles of Environmental Science 
and Engineering
3 credits
Prerequisites: graduate standing
This course applies the principles of science and engineering to 
environmental systems and pollution management. Specifically 
covered will be chemical kinetics, mass balance models, reactor 
models, mass transfer, biological principles governing ecosystems, 
water and wastewater treatment, air pollution control, and solid and 
hazardous waste management. Offered: Spring semester
GENV 517 Limnology of the Great Lakes with Lab
4 credits
Prerequisite: a course in Hydrology is preferred but not required 
A study of the physical, chemical and biological aspects of the 
Great Lakes. Advanced limnological concepts will be incorporated 
into understanding the past, present and future condition of the 
Lakes. Field and laboratory experiences will include the analysis 
of Lake Erie water samples for chemical, biological and physical 
interpretation using standard procedures. Field experiences will 
include trips on the R/V Environaut, Gannon’s research vessel. 
Offered: Varies
GENV 520 Environmental Site Assessment
2 credits
This course covers the background and techniques required of an 
environmental professional in performing Phase I and Phase II 
environmental site assessments. These assessments are commonly 
required when there is a transfer of ownership of commercial 
or industrial property. Topics include site characterization, fate 
and transport, and application of the three attainment standards 
associated with Act II, Pennsylvania Land Recycling Program. 
Hands-on field experience included in the course activities. 
Offered: Varies
GENV 522 Wetlands Science and Engineering
2 credits
Wetlands Science and Engineering is a comprehensive course 
in wetland identification, function and value assessments, and 
management. The course will cover the fundamentals of identifying 
and delineating jurisdictional wetlands utilizing the current 
methods described in the 1987 US Army Corps of Engineers 
Manual. Comparative reference will be made to the 1989 EPA 
Joint Manual. Wetland design and construction methods will be 
presented as applicable to water quality enhancement, wildlife 
habitat improvement, storm water management, and riparian 
environments. Offered: Fall
GENV 535 Water Quality Modeling
4 credits
Pre/Corequisites: (ENV 403 or GENV 536) and GENV 503, or 
permission of the Instructor.
An overview of fundamental processes and models developed to 
simulate and predict changes in water quality in natural settings. 
This course will be restricted to freshwater surface waters, 
particularly streams and rivers, but there will be some discussion of 
lakes and reservoirs. Students will become familiar with USEPA’s 
BASINS (a GIS software for the presentation and analysis of water 
quality data) and the models associated with it. 
GENV 536 Environmental Chemistry
3 credits 
Prerequisite: two semesters of undergraduate chemistry
This course will cover various chemistry topics that are applicable 
to environmental science. Emphasis is placed upon principles of 
water chemistry and quantitative chemical analysis. Course will 
discuss basic principles of thermodynamics, adsorption isotherm, 
chemical equilibrium, redox, organic water pollutants and various 
analytical instruments such as atomic absorption spectroscopy and 
chromatography. Offered: Fall semester
GENV 537 Environmental Chemistry Lab
1 credit
Pre/Corequisite: GENV 536
Laboratory to accompany Environmental Chemistry. Lab exercises 
in applied, environmental aspects of physical, organic, and 
inorganic chemistry, including instrumental analysis. Offered: 
Fall semester
GENV 540 Industrial Health I
3 credits
Prerequisite: GENV 542
This course will review the basic principles and knowledge required 
to recognize, evaluate and control hazardous agents within the 
workplace environment. The topics to be covered include: an 
overview of occupational health and safety regulations, workplace 
exposure limits and standards, air sampling principles and 
techniques, chemical hazard identification and control, ventilation 
and biohazards. Offered: Spring semester
GENV 541 Industrial Health II
3 credits
This is the second part of a two-semester course that covers the 
basic principles and knowledge required to recognize, evaluate and 
control hazardous agents within the workplace. Topics covered 
include: ergonomics, radiation hazards, heat stress, noise and noise 
control, respiratory protection, risk assessment, and health and 
safety programs. Offered: Varies
108
GENV 542 Environmental Toxicology
3 credits
Prerequisites: Organic Chemistry
This course provides an overview of the theory, basic concepts and 
application of environmental toxicology. A public health approach 
is used in applying these concepts to protect human health. Topics 
covered include: dose-response relationships, toxicokinetics, bio-
transformation and elimination of toxicants, target organ toxicity, 
carcinogenesis, risk assessment and the standard-setting process. 
Offered: Fall Semester
GENV 544 Environmental Law and Regulations
3 credits
The course introduces students to the major concepts of 
environmental law. Because environmental law is grounded in 
both federal and state statutes, the course will expose students to 
major components of statutory law at both levels, and will also 
explore the federal/state relationship using Pennsylvania as a model. 
Although a basic understanding of the American legal system and 
administrative law would be of great benefit, it is not a prerequisite 
to the course. Offered: Spring semester
GENV 546 Industrial Hygiene Sampling Techniques
2 credits
Pre/Co-requisite: GENV 540
Develop an understanding of practices and procedures of 
environmental/occupational sampling and interpretation of 
collected data. Emphasis is applied to air sampling techniques and 
methods, and industrial hygiene sampling. Offered: Varies
GENV 547 Epidemiology
3 credits
This course will review the basic principles related to the design and 
implementation of epidemiologic studies. The topics to be covered 
include: application of epidemiologic studies, study designs, 
statistical issues, exposure and health outcome measurements, 
measurement error and data interpretation. Examples and 
applications are specific to occupational and environmental 
epidemiology. Offered: Varies
GENV 549 Industrial Safety
3 credits
This course provides students with an introduction to the major 
facets of effective safety and health management programs 
and the associated regulatory environments, using both OSHA 
and ISO (international) guidelines. The course offers practical 
approaches to managing risk to people and property, with a focus 
on industrial workplaces. Students will develop technical skills 
by studying ergonomic, equipment design, machine guarding, 
chemical safety and fire suppression principles. Students will 
also be exposed to basic project management principles and will 
be afforded opportunities to enhance their critical thinking and 
communication skills via industrial safety case studies and project 
planning exercises. Offered: Varies
GENV 551 Water and Wastewater Treatment  
Design Engineering
3 credits
Prerequisites: ENV 403 or GENV 503; Co-requisite: GENV 553
The course covers the fundamental processes and operations 
commonly used at typical drinking water treatment plants and 
municipal wastewater treatment plants. The student will learn 
how to specify the sequence of operations and size the important 
elements in treatment plant operations. Offered: Fall semester
GENV 553 Water-Wastewater Treatment Lab
1 credit
Co/Prerequisite: GENV 551 
This course will support GENV 551, Water/Wastewater Treatment 
Engineering, by providing laboratory experiences which 
complement the principles and engineering practices presented in 
the lecture sessions. Topics covered will include those operations 
typically found at water and wastewater treatment plants, and used 
by consulting engineers to conduct bench-scale and pilot-scale 
studies for treatment plants. (3 hour lab). Offered: Fall semester
GENV 555 Air Pollution Control Engineering
3 credits
Prerequisites: ENV 403 or GENV 503
This course focuses on the technology and methodologies used 
to reduce concentration levels of pollutants being released to the 
atmosphere. The statutes, regulations, and permitting protocol will 
be introduced since they constitute an important requirement for 
obtaining legal authority to build a facility that will emit pollutants 
to the atmosphere. Integrated knowledge of fluid mechanics, 
thermodynamics, chemistry, and mathematics, will be applied. 
Topics covered will include the nature and dynamic behavior of 
particulate matters, collection methods and analytical techniques, 
air pollution control/reduction methods, treatment technologies and 
air pollution control devices, and control of NOx, SOx, and volatile 
organic compounds (VOCs). Offered: Spring Semester
GENV 565 Soil and Groundwater Pollution
3 credits
Prerequisites: ENV 403 or GENV 503
Soil serves as a multifunctional and crucial natural system for the 
reception, storage, and transport of water and pollutants to aquifer 
media. In this course, a fundamental understanding of physics, 
geology and hydrogeology, and chemistry, along with engineering 
principles, will be used to understand the dynamic nature of 
fluid flow and contaminant fate and transport in porous media. 
Topics covered include the hydrologic cycle, sources and types of 
contaminants, remediation technologies, and well hydraulics theory 
and field examples. Offered: Spring semester
109
Environmental Science and Engineering (ESE)
GENV 574 Environmental Microbiology
2 credits
Prerequisite: a college course in microbiology;  
Co-requisite: GENV 578
The course will cover the applied effects of microorganisms on 
both the environment and human health/activities. The topics to 
be covered during this course include: biogeochemical cycling; 
municipal water and wastewater treatment; bioremediation; 
detection and quantification techniques; and the control of human 
pathogens. Offered: Varies
GENV 577 Solid and Hazardous Waste Management
3 credits
Prerequisites: GENV 536 and permission of the instructor
The objective of this course is to apply multidisciplinary 
approaches to managing solid and hazardous wastes. Topics include 
familiarization with sources, classification, storage, transportation, 
various physicochemical and biological remediation technologies, 
and pertinent federal and state regulations. Knowledge of 
physicochemical and/or biological characteristics of a waste will 
be used to design appropriate disposal options. Offered: Varies
GENV 578 Environmental Microbiology Laboratory
2 credits
Pre/Corequisite: GENV 574
This lab accompanies GENV 574 and includes field and lab 
work which aid in understanding environmental microbiological 
principles. Offered: Varies
600 level courses (for graduate students only)
GENV 645 Human Health Risk Assessment 
3 credits
This course will cover the principles and application of risk 
assessment to determine the risk of human health effects from 
environmental hazards. Methods for evaluating potential 
environmental exposures will be examined coupled with the 
principles and concepts of toxicology as covered in GENV 542. 
Specific topics to be covered include the application of various risk 
assessment paradigms; the EPA risk assessment guidelines; and 
the use of risk assessment in environmental/occupational standard 
setting. Offered: Varies
GENV 656 Air Quality Modeling and Measurement
3 credits
Prerequisites: GENV 503
This course covers the basic concepts and theory for air quality 
modeling and measurement of point, line and area emission sources 
along with considerations of micro-meteorological and transport 
mechanisms. The use of computer simulation models for pollution 
impact prediction and model calibration and validation procedures 
will be covered. Offered: Varies
GENV 680 Graduate Environmental Internship 
1-4 credits
GENV 692-693 Special Topics
1-3 credits
GENV 694 Graduate Thesis
6-9 credits 
GENV 695 Research Paper or Project 
3 credits
110
Healthcare 
Administration
Director: Rick Stachel, D.Sc.
INTRODUCTION
Healthcare facilities are increasingly complex to manage due to 
many factors: increased governmental regulation, demand for 
accountability, advances in healthcare technology, the changing 
demographics of the country, and the variety of reimbursement 
systems. There is a pressing need for qualified healthcare 
administrators to plan, organize, direct, and control their 
organization’s resources.
The Master of Healthcare Administration (MHA) degree is designed 
to meet this need through an executive choice format. Students 
can complete the program entirely online, online with the option 
of joining any number of weekly enrichment sessions through 
web/video conferencing, or entirely face-to-face. Students who 
choose the face-to-face option will be able to interact weekly with 
the online cohort who attend via web/video conferencing for the 
optional enrichment sessions.
Regardless of modality, all courses in the program are 7-weeks long. 
Graduate students typically take two courses per semester. Given 
the dynamic curriculum and flexible modalities, the MHA program 
is ideal for working professionals who wish to continue to work 
while pursuing their education to advance or change their careers. 
The program consists of 36 credits over 12 courses and students 
can begin the program in the fall or spring semesters. The Gannon 
MHA Program may be pursued on either a full-time or part-time 
basis. The program is housed in the College of Engineering and 
Business and carries the STEM designation.
MISSION AND OUTCOMES  
OF THE MHA PROGRAM
The Gannon University MHA’s mission is to prepare early 
healthcare-management careerists and recent college graduates for 
diverse positions in healthcare administration from entry to upper 
level. The program provides a foundational health management 
education based on Gannon’s intellectual tradition to regional and 
global students. The program offers flexible delivery of innovative, 
project-based learning in a cohort format that prepares students for 
employment and career advancement in healthcare organizations 
across the continuum of care. That includes hospitals, physician 
practices, long-term care, insurance companies, pharmaceutical 
and medical device manufacturing, and consultant organizations.
At the completion of the program students will:
1. 	Demonstrate knowledge of the skills, terminology and pro-
fessional conduct necessary to align with positions into which 
the students enter. Apply best practices in team settings and 
collaborative projects in hybrid environments. 
2.	 Be able to effectively communicate to both healthcare profes-
sional and nonprofessional audiences.
3.	 Be able to raise vital questions and formulate them clearly; gather 
and assess relevant information using appropriate business tools, 
abstract ideas and critcal thinking. They will be able to justify 
their answers and analyze their information in terms of clarity, 
accuracy, relevance, and fairness.
4.	 Develop effective leadership and ethics-based decision-making 
skills to support the welfare of both healthcare organizations and 
communities.
VISION STATEMENT
The Gannon University MHA program aims to be a regionally 
recognized program of choice for students who desire a real-world, 
experience-based education that provides them the confidence and 
ethical guidance to become renowned and respected healthcare 
leaders.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
For all students:
Candidates for the Master’s program will be considered for 
enrollment on a rolling basis. Students will be notified of the 
admissions decision after review from the Office of Graduate 
Admissions and the MHA Program Director. Applicants are asked 
to meet the following admissions criteria:
•	 Undergraduate degree (or expected completion of an 
undergraduate degree prior to enrollment) 
•	 Minimum 3.00 overall GPA
•	 If your undergraduate GPA is less than a 3.0 on a 4.0 scale, there 
are two options:
	
–		 Take the GMAT and achieve a score of 1050 using the 
formula: 200 x (undergraduate GPA) + GMAT score.
	
–		 GMAT requirement may be waived based on professional 
experience following the Program Director’s review of 
application
Applicants are asked to submit the following information to the 
Gannon University Office of Graduate Admissions:
•	 Completed graduate application (online) 
•	 Official academic transcripts from all prior institutions
•	 Professional resume
Non-Degree Status is offered to students who, after admissions 
review, show academic promise and are seeking professional 
development. A maximum of 9 credits may be taken as a non-
degree student.
111
Healthcare Administration
4+1 MASTER OF HEALTHCARE 
ADMINISTRATION (MHA) PROGRAM
The 4+1 MHA program is designed to allow undergraduate 
students (from many disciplines) the opportunity to earn both an 
undergraduate degree and MHA in five years. Students from any 
major may apply and should do so before they begin their junior 
year. Working with both the undergraduate advisor and the MHA 
Program Director, the student will customize a schedule in which 
they will take graduate courses during their junior or senior years. 
Students who successfully complete these courses may apply to 
continue into the MHA program to complete the remaining credits. 
Applicants to the program must have a 3.0 undergraduate GPA. 
Retention in the program requires that the student maintain a 
minimum of a 3.0 GPA for their undergraduate studies.
CURRICULUM
The Gannon MHA is a professional degree program. MHA 
students are generally working professionals who balance their 
studies with their careers. Instruction is offered face-to-face or 
completely online; but fully online students have the opportunity 
to join faculty-hosted (optional) enrichment sessions once a week 
for each course. The flexibility in program modality options allows 
students to continue working while completing their degree on a 
full-time or part-time basis (within one to two years, respectively). 
The face-to-face component also allows global students to attend 
classroom sessions on a full-time basis. They can complete the 
program in one year by taking 12 credits a semester or in 18 months 
by taking nine credits a semester.
REQUIRED COURSEWORK
GMHA 601	
Introduction to Health Systems Organizations  
and Management
GMHA 603	
Healthcare Services Marketing 
GMHA 605	
Quality Management in Health Care Services
GMHA 606	
Healthcare Information Systems and Technology
GMHA 609	
Comparative Healthcare Economics
GMHA 610	
Healthcare Management and Leadership
GMHA 611	
Healthcare Research and Quantitative Methods
GMHA 625	
Healthcare Law and Ethics
GMHA 661	
Healthcare Finance
GMBA 641	
Operations and Supply Chain Management 
GMBA 736	
Human Resource Management
GMHA 799	
Strategic Management 
Total credits: 36
NOTE: An internship is recommended but not required. Students 
can register for GMHA 780/Internship for 0-credit. 
Courses may be waived on a course-by-course basis based upon 
academic and employment background at the discretion of the Di- 
rector. However, 36 hours of course work, including required cours-
es and substitute electives, are required for program completion.
Students who complete the MHA degree program are eligible to 
earn the Healthcare Business Analytics Certificate upon success-
ful completion of the 12 credits of required coursework and the 
appropriate GPA.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GMHA 601 Introduction to Health Systems  
Organizations and Management
3 credits
Prerequisites: None
This course introduces students to the management of healthcare 
organizations. It includes an examination of the environments in 
which the organizations operate, including the following: the types 
of organizations in the care continuum, types and categorizations of 
practitioners and clinicians, and the role of insurers, policymakers 
and regulators. The course also introduces students to the topic of 
underserved and vulnerable populations as well as innovation in 
the healthcare industry. The course also describes how healthcare 
services are financed in various delivery models including: The 
Beveridge Model, The Bismarck Model, The National Health 
Insurance Model and the Out-of-Pocket Model.
GMHA 603 Healthcare Services Marketing
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601
This course provides students with a thorough understanding of the 
principles and concepts of health care marketing. Essential elements 
of marketing are discussed in detail to assist students in applying 
this knowledge in today’s dynamic healthcare environment. 
GMHA 605 Quality Management in Healthcare Services
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601 and Statistics
This course focuses on strategies to measure and improve healthcare 
efficiency, effectiveness, patient satisfaction, and quality. It 
considers various quality standards and protocols, preparing the 
health administrator to gather, assess, and act on data from a variety 
of sources. It addresses the role of getting stakeholders engaged to 
develop a safety culture and to achieve organizational goals that 
drive recognition, patient safety, and reimbursement.
112
GMHA 606 Healthcare Information Systems and Technology 
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601
This survey and analysis of healthcare information systems 
planning and leadership prepares health administrators to 
communicate productively with information technology and clinical 
professionals. The course explores the challenges of selecting 
and implementing information systems to achieve organizational 
mission. The course focuses on how and from whom health 
administrators should gather information and judge its veracity. 
It also considers other organizational data and issues that go into 
selection decisions and implementation plans. Attention will be 
given to various stakeholders and how to manage their impact on 
IT projects.
GMHA 609 Comparative Healthcare Economics 
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601
This course introduces the economic foundations of healthcare 
based on traditional economic analysis, such as: production 
functions, marginal analysis, supply and demand analysis, cost 
benefit analysis market efficiencies, utility, buyer behavior and the 
influence of government policies. This course also investigates, 
analyzes and compares the economic effects of the four types of 
healthcare-payer models in use around the word: The Beveridge 
Model, The Bismarck Model, The National Health Insurance Model 
and the Out-of-Pocket Model.
GMHA 610 Healthcare Management and Leadership
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601
 This course examines leadership concepts as they apply specifically 
in healthcare organizations. Topics such as managing change, 
intra-organizational communication, and high-level decision 
making are included. The course focuses on building skills to sort 
through and make sense of the plethora of information available 
in making judgment calls. Focusing on leadership, the course goes 
well beyond management, helping students recognize, building 
on and enhancing their skills and increase their adaptability. This 
course also stresses the importance of identification, empathy, and 
communication with relevant stakeholders.
GMHA 611 Healthcare Research and Quantitative Methods
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601 and Statistics
This course focuses on the value of various research methods and 
resulting data for running an efficient and effective organization. 
The course focuses on the development of skills to assemble and 
analyze research information. The course acknowledges that most 
health administrators will not be designing and running research 
projects but that they must be able to communicate with researchers 
in a variety of disciplines. They must be able to recognize quality 
research protocols and select findings that can complement data 
from other disciplines in leadership decision making.
GMHA 625 Healthcare Law and Ethics
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601
This course examines the roles and legal rights of patients, 
administrators, governing boards, state and federal government, 
third-party payers, and healthcare providers. It focuses on providing 
healthcare administrator the knowledge of how and when to 
communicate with legal experts and how to use appropriate legal 
precepts. This course provides an introduction to the concept of 
ethics in healthcare settings. The course also provides a historical 
perspective on the development of healthcare ethics, the role 
of the ethics professionals, the principles of health care ethics 
and the connection between ethics, and quality improvement in 
various healthcare settings. Special topics include liability, risk 
management, patient-provider relationships, fraud and abuse, 
antitrust, and health legislation. This course will also examine 
selected business law topics including agency and partnership, 
business corporations, and joint ventures.
GMHA 661 Healthcare Finance
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601 and Accounting or Finance
This course explores financial theory and its practical application in 
healthcare across a full application in healthcare across a full range 
of facilities, from hospitals and home health agencies to skilled 
nursing facilities, surgical centers, and private physician practices.
GMBA 641 Operations and Supply Chain Management
3 credits
Prerequisite: GMHA 601 and Statistics
The course is designed to introduce students to the principles of 
operations and supply chain management and their application 
in decision making. The topics covered include logistics, 
transportation, inventory management, warehousing, materials 
management, global supply, demand management, project 
management, e-commerce, finance, and network design.
GMBA 736 Human Resource Management 
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601
The knowledge, skills, and abilities of the workers in a firm are 
its most valuable resource. This course helps students recognize 
the strategic importance of human resource management. The 
student will explore contemporary techniques of resource analysis, 
testing, recruiting, selection, training, appraisal, and compensation 
planning, and will integrate these techniques with the strategic 
focus of the firm.
113
Healthcare Business Analytics Certificate – Online
GMHA 780 Internship 
0 Credits
Prerequisites: Approval of Program Director
This non-credit bearing course provides students with practical 
experience allowing them to apply advanced knowledge and skills 
to an internship position. The work role is related to the students’ 
professional interests in their area of study and is supervised by 
a field coordinator; the internship experience must be secured 
by the student and approved by the MHA Program Director or a 
designee of the School of Business prior to the student registering 
for the course. 
GMHA 799 Healthcare Strategic Management
3 credits 
Prerequisites: Completion of all 600 level MHA courses
This last course in the Gannon MHA program consolidates 
learning from every other course in a real-life strategic analysis 
of a healthcare organization in transition. The course focuses on 
the main processes in planning and delivering health care to the 
community, such as needs assessment, feasibility studies, strategic 
marketing design, and implementation and evaluation strategies and 
methods. This course is an application exercise; simulating activities 
healthcare administrators engage in daily, pulling information from 
various sources and packaging it for effective decision making. 
The course is intended to be a practical, interesting, exciting, and 
informative culmination for the MHA program. 
Healthcare 
Business 
Analytics 
Certificate – 
Online
Director: Rick Stachel, D.Sc., MBA
INTRODUCTION
The Healthcare Business Analytics certificate provides the essential 
capabilities necessary for individuals who want to establish 
themselves as recognized professionals with expertise in the 
collection, analysis and reporting of business data in a healthcare 
environment. The program is designed for working healthcare 
professionals or individuals who may have experience in business 
analytics but want to build upon their strengths to transition into 
healthcare. The certificate develops competencies in healthcare data 
analytics by exposing students to the tools and models encountered 
in various analytics disciplines in healthcare organizations and is 
taught by experts in their respective fields.
Because the credits associated with the certificate are part of the 
Master of Healthcare Administration (MHA) program, students can 
use the certificate as a steppingstone to completion of the MHA. The 
certificate, which is composed of four courses, is delivered online 
and is designed to be completed in one academic year. Students will 
begin in the fall, and they will complete the coursework in 7-week 
increments, concluding the program in the spring of the following 
calendar year. The certificate outcomes have been aligned with the 
Certified Associate in Healthcare Information and Management 
Systems (CAHiMS) certification offered through the Healthcare 
Information and Management Systems Society (HiMSS), and after 
completion of the certificate program, students will be prepared to 
sit for the CAHiMS certification exam.
114
CERTIFICATE OUTCOMES
After completing the certificate, the participants will be able to:
1. 	Demonstrate an understanding of the history, utilization, 
influences and challenges of technology within healthcare 
organizations and use that to recommend technology solutions 
that delivery data-driven improvements.
2. 	Obtain an understanding of data management and various 
analytical methods and models designed to answer critical 
healthcare business questions to deliver quality care to patients.
3. 	Experiment with the analytical functions of Electronic Health 
Record (EHR) systems and determine the significance of data 
analysis outputs in delivering value to patient care and business 
performance.
4. 	Work collaboratively to gather and analyze stakeholder needs 
and requirements to align those with healthcare services and 
product priorities and objectives.
5. 	Apply data analytics principles to evaluate business structures, 
sources of capital, project cash flow, revenue cycles and third-
party payment models.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
•	 Undergraduate degree (or expected completion of an 
undergraduate degree prior to enrollment) with a minimum 
3.00 overall GPA.
•	 If your undergraduate GPA is less than a 3.0 on a 4.0 scale, 
there are two options:
	
–  Take the GMAT and achieve a score of 1050 using the 
formula: 200 x (undergraduate GPA) + GMAT score.
	
–  GMAT requirement may be waived based on professional 
experience following the Program Director’s review of 
application
•	 Three undergraduate-level credit hours in the following: 
	
– 	 Statistics 
	
– 	 Finance OR Accounting 
	
In lieu of these undergraduate courses, applicants may 
choose to satisfy this requirement by completing the course 
work with Peregrine Academic Services. Gannon University 
contracts with Peregrine to provide a low-cost, non-credit 
alternative. These modules are self-paced, on-line offerings 
that include all materials. 
	
Applicants are asked to submit the following information to 
the Gannon University Office of Graduate Admissions: 
•	 Completed graduate application (online)
•	 Official academic transcripts from all prior institutions
•	 Professional resume
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GMHA 601 Introduction to Health Systems  
Organizations and Management
3 credits
Prerequisites: None
This course introduces students to the management of healthcare 
organizations. It includes an examination of the environments in 
which the organizations operate, including the following: the types 
of organizations in the care continuum, types and categorizations of 
practitioners and clinicians, and the role of insurers, policymakers 
and regulators. The course also introduces students to the topic of 
underserved and vulnerable populations as well as innovation in 
the healthcare industry. The course also describes how healthcare 
services are financed in various delivery models including: The 
Beveridge Model, The Bismarck Model, The National Health 
Insurance Model and the Out-of-Pocket Model.
GMHA 606 Healthcare Information Systems and Technology
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601
This survey and analysis of healthcare information systems 
planning, and leadership prepares health administrators to 
communicate productively with information technology and clinical 
professionals. The course explores the challenges of selecting 
and implementing information systems to achieve organizational 
mission. The course focuses on how and from whom health 
administrators should gather information and judge its veracity. 
It also considers other organizational data and issues that go into 
selection decisions and implementation plans. Attention will be 
given to various stakeholders and how to manage their impact on 
IT projects.
GMHA 611 Healthcare Research and Quantitative Methods
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601 and Statistics
This course focuses on the value of various research methods and 
resulting data for running an efficient and effective organization. 
The course focuses on the development of skills to assemble and 
analyze research information. The course acknowledges that most 
health administrators will not be designing and running research 
projects but that they must be able to communicate with researchers 
in a variety of disciplines. They must be able to recognize quality 
research protocols and select findings that can complement data 
from other disciplines in leadership decision making.
GMHA 661 Healthcare Finance
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMHA 601 and Accounting or Finance
This course explores financial theory and its practical application in 
healthcare across a full application in healthcare across a full range 
of facilities, from hospitals and home health agencies to skilled 
nursing facilities, surgical centers, and private physician practices.
115
Information Assurance and Cybersecurity
Information 
Assurance and 
Cybersecurity
Director: Yunkai Liu, Ph.D.
INTRODUCTION
Information Assurance has been one of the most dynamic fields in 
recent decades. With growing demand for computing professionals, 
the who wish to stay abreast of the rapidly changing technological 
world. Emphasis is placed on the development of the student’s skill 
for independent study and continued professional growth.
Keeping our critical cyber infrastructure safe and secure while 
maintaining privacy is a major concern. The report by Cybersecurity 
Ventures predicts that there will be 3.5 million unfilled cyberse-
curity positions globally by 2021. The Bureau of Labor Statistics 
has also predicted that the current number of cybersecurity job 
openings is up. Every cybersecurity worker needs to be equipped 
with cybersecurity concepts and know-how to protect and defend 
apps, data, networks, devices, critical systems, infrastructure, and 
people. This program is aimed at filling the void and designed 
for professionals who work full-time. It provides post bachelor’s 
academic credentials for their success leading to targeted indus-
try-recognized certifications. The program targets professionals 
holding a nontechnical undergraduate or graduate degree and 
looking to improve their knowledge in cybersecurity, increase their 
job prospects, or take the first step towards a graduate degree in 
the cybersecurity field.
PROGRAM OUTCOMES
At the conclusion of study leading to the degree of Master of 
Science in Information Assurance and Cybersecurity, the graduate 
is able to:
IA&C-1.		
Identify patterns in cybersecurity intrusion detection 
and preventing techniques.
IA&C-2.		
Manage large-scale network management and security 
implementation on ground and cloud and the practical 
issues surrounding how the data privacy and security.
IA&C-3.		
Able to use creativity, critical thinking, and analysis 
and research skills to solve theoretical and real-world 
problems in cybersecurity field.
IA&C-4.		
Recognize professional responsibilities including and 
make informed decisions in cybersecurity practice.
IA&C-5.		
Communicate competently in a variety of cybersecurity 
professional contexts. 
IA&C-6.		
Provide a research or development contribution or 
development of value to the profession, industry 
or society
DEGREE OFFERED
The program offers a Master of Science in Information Assurance 
and Cybersecurity (MS-IAC) degree.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
1. 	An applicant must present a baccalaureate degree with a GPA 
of at least 2.5/4.0.
2. 	Completed graduate application
3. 	Complete resume
4. 	Transcripts from all prior institutions
5. 	Three letters of recommendation
6. 	TOEFL scores if English is not a first language
Factors for consideration include work experience in related areas 
of CIS and letters of recommendation. A committee appointed by 
the department chairperson will review applications for admission.
ADMINISTRATION
Retention is contingent on maintaining at least a 3.0 grade point 
average (GPA). The course work is expected to be completed within 
two years for full-time students and within six years for part-time 
students. The degree requirements are at least thirty credit hours 
of study.
The program is intended to be offered in both face-to-face and 
online delivery mode. The face-to-face delivery mode, academic 
semester consists of fourteen to fifteen weeks of instruction, 
including one week for final exams. The courses are scheduled 
as regular sessions and classes meet in rooms appropriate for the 
course being taught. Courses requiring the use of lab equipment as 
part of their instructional model are taught in computer teaching 
labs and may include an additional lab fee.
In online delivery mode, each academic semester typically consists 
of fourteen weeks with two courses offered in sequence. The 
courses are scheduled as regular online, 7-week courses. Courses 
requiring the use of lab equipment as part of their instructional 
model are taught in with distributable software/licenses and/or 
simulations. Courses requiring these additional materials may 
include a modest course fee.
The University’s policy is that a master’s degree program must 
be completed within six years of taking the first course. Only the 
Program Director and/or the Dean can grant exceptions.
PROJECT REQUIREMENT
Each graduate student is expected to conduct a directed research 
/ development project or thesis for completion of the degree; (see 
Plans A and B below). To propose an independent project, the 
student requests a specific CySec faculty member as the project 
advisor to chair his/her review committee in agreement with the 
CySec faculty member. Decisions about the topic, project advisor 
and the committee members are shared between the student and 
116
the review committee chair. The committee members participate in 
reviewing quality and content for the directed research project/thesis 
and its written component. These project proposals and formulation 
of graduate project/thesis committees must be completed prior to 
registration for any Directed Project or Directed Research credits.
Proposal sessions are scheduled during the last weeks of each semes-
ter. Various communication channels are utilized to disseminate the 
procedure and deadline on signing up for proposal sessions. Students, 
who wish to register for GCYSEC 698/GCYSEC 699 credits for 
the coming semester, must follow the communicated procedure and 
deadline to be scheduled in one of the proposal sessions.
The directed research project/thesis advisor directs the student’s 
work and determines when to recommend the manuscript for review 
by a faculty committee. The review committee is appointed by 
the usual academic approval sequence and consists of at least two 
full-time Gannon CIS faculty members familiar with the subject 
material and one optional member from outside the CIS department. 
The outside member can be from industry. The committee is 
responsible for supporting the student in their work and assessing 
the quality of the project. After final corrections are made in the 
project and/or supporting documentation, the student will give an 
oral defense of their work before the committee. The CIS faculty 
member who chairs the review committee becomes the student’s 
academic advisor.
Plan A (Directed Research): GCYSEC 699
The student is required to complete a 3-credit independent/team 
IAC research project and to pass a final oral examination covering 
the student’s project area and related subject areas. The content 
of the independent/ team research should be in-depth scholarship 
culminating in a publishable-quality manuscript. The content 
should represent a researched and creative expression of the 
student’s advanced capability as a result of the graduate program. 
The directed research must be proposed and approved prior to the 
commencement of the independent/team project work. Proposals 
must be approved prior to registering for research credits. Per 
department guidelines, directed research students register for 
GCYSEC 699 Directed Research when completing the research 
effort and after having received agreement from a faculty member 
to be the chair of the student’s research effort. 
Plan B (Directed Project): GCYSEC 698
The student is required to complete a 3-credit independent/team 
IAC project and to pass a final oral examination covering the 
student’s project area and related subject areas. The content of the 
independent/ team project can be either (1) study and development 
of a prototype-level application culminating in a publishable-
quality technical report. The content should represent a researched 
and creative expression of the student’s advanced capability as a 
result of the graduate program. The directed development project 
must be proposed and approved prior to the commencement of 
the independent/team project work. Proposals must be approved 
prior to registering for project credits. Per department guidelines, 
directed project students register for GCYSEC 698 Directed Project 
when completing the development effort and after having received 
agreement from a faculty member to be the chair of the student’s 
development effort. 
While enrolled in GCYSEC 698 and GCYSEC 699 Directed 
Research, the student is required to satisfy other department-
stipulated activities such as attendance at research seminars, 
participation in research presentations, and writing- or research-
improvement seminars.
THE CURRICULUM PLAN
The MS-IAC is a professional degree program. Students may begin 
studies with a wide variety of academic and work backgrounds.
Courses are presented in three general categories:
•	 Cyber Essentials Courses:  
12 credits of required coursework. 
•	 Information Assurance Courses:  
9 credits of required coursework.
•	 Scholarship Seminar: 
3 credits of required coursework.
•	 Cyber Electives:  
3 credits required of upper-division coursework.
The student must complete 30 credits of graduate course work. 
Students must maintain a cumulative grade point average of at 
least 3.0 for the duration of their master’s degree program. A total 
of ten graduate level courses (500-level or higher), exclusive of 
foundations-series courses are required. Students seeking placement 
for required coursework may be granted placement for certification, 
significant work experience on review of the program director.
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
Cybersecurity Essentials (12 credits): Four courses:
GCYSEC 501		
Networking Fundamentals
GCYSEC 502		
Cybersecurity Foundations
GCYSEC 503		
Security Leadership
GCYSEC 504		
Cybersecurity Management
Information Assurance (9 credits): Three courses:
GCYSEC 605		
Asset Security and Risk Management
GCYSEC 606		
Information Security Architectures
GCYSEC 607		
Security Assessment and Access Control
Scholarship Seminar (3 credits): One course:
GCIS 605	
	
Scholarship Seminar
Cybersecurity Elective (3 credits): One of:
GCYSEC 608		
Operations and Software Development Security
GCYSEC 609		
Digital Forensics
GCYSEC 610		
Network Management and Security 
Implementation
GCYSEC 611		
Penetration Testing
117
Information Assurance and Cybersecurity
Or other GCIS courses (Not foundation courses)
Directed Project or Directed Research (3 credits): One of:
GCYSEC 698		
Directed Project or
GCYSEC 699		
Directed Research 
DEPARTMENT POLICIES
Incomplete Grades in IAC coursework
Incomplete (“I”) grades for a course within the CIS Department 
require students to follow extra procedures in order for the “I” 
grade to be appropriately handled.
•	 Students must obtain confirmation from the course instructor 
to be assigned the “I” grade.
•	 The course instructor and student complete and sign an 
“Incomplete Grades” form before issuing the “I” grade. The 
form identifies required deliverables, expected delivery dates, 
and consequences for not following through on the work.
•	 The course instructor and student complete and sign a 
“Behavioral Contract”. The contract stipulates other activities 
and arrangements expected of the student in order to earn a grade 
in the course.
•	 The course instructor submits both forms to the department and 
to Graduate Records.
•	 If the “I” grade is assigned for either GCYSEC 698 Directed 
Research or GCYSEC 699 Directed Research, then the student 
is also required to register for GCIS 697 (1 cr.) Directed Project 
in the semester when the incomplete work is being done. 
Registering for GCIS 697 Directed Project is to occur regardless 
of the other courses registered in the semester.
Research and Technical Projects
All qualifying research and/or technical projects must be 
successfully proposed to the department faculty and have a 
review committee assigned prior to course registration. Standards 
for project scope and proposal methods are managed by the 
department chair. Externally-sponsored projects are encouraged, 
but not required. All projects must have a computing faculty 
member in charge of the work, with a supporting committee of two 
department faculty and optionally one external committee member. 
The committee is assigned by the chair prior to registration. The 
committee is responsible for: 
•	 Supporting the student in completing their work
•	 Approving changes to the defined work scope,
•	 Judging the quality of the project work through the written and 
oral presentations of the work. 
•	 Grading of these courses is by the committee as a whole.
Students are responsible to identify the project, stakeholders and/
or topics, and complete the project on their own. Students are 
encouraged to identify and start work on their projects, especially 
requirements and exploratory research prior to proposing their 
projects. Students should register for their project or thesis credits in 
the semester that they expect to complete the project, not necessarily 
in the semester they start the project. Please refer questions to the 
program director or chair. 
C-Grade Policy
Gannon graduate students are required to earn a grade point average 
(GPA) of 3.0 or better in order to successfully complete the graduate 
program. IAC graduate students are expected to maintain a semester 
GPA of 3.0 or better. Because of IAC scheduling patterns, the 
necessity of retaking a course to improve one’s GPA may cause 
the duration of one’s graduate studies to extend one year or more.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GCYSEC 501 Networking Fundamental
3 credits
Prerequisite: None
Topics include networking models and media, architectures, topol-
ogies, devices, protocols, use of tools, processes, threads, memory, 
file systems, virtualization, access control, domain separation, 
process isolation, resource encapsulation, and least privilege.
GCYSEC 502 Cybersecurity Foundations
3 credits
Prerequisite: GCYSEC 501 or equivalent
Topics include Malware, vulnerability scanning, and penetration 
testing; Network components, frameworks, and secure network 
architectures; Identity and access management control; Policies, 
plans, and procedures; and cryptographic concepts.
GCYSEC 503 Security Leadership
3 credits
Prerequisite: GCYSEC 501 or equivalent
Topics include cryptographic applications; incident response and 
business continuity; and managing security operations center, 
application security, negotiations and vendors, projects, and security 
architecture.
GCYSEC 504 Cybersecurity Management
3 credits
Prerequisite: GCYSEC 501 or equivalent
Topics include managing security awareness and policy, system 
security and program structure; network monitoring, security 
and privacy; network concepts; risk management and security 
frameworks; and vulnerability management.
GCYSEC 605 Asset Security and Risk Management
3 credits
Prerequisite: GCYSEC 501 or equivalent 
This course focuses on access control, information security 
governance and risk management, cryptography, security 
architecture and design, software security, business continuity, 
and disaster recovery planning, network security, physical 
security, operations security, laws, regulations, investigations, 
and compliance.
118
CYSEC 606 Security Architecture for Information 
Communication and Networks
3 credits
Prerequisites: GCYSEC 605 
This course focuses on access control, cryptography, security 
architecture and design, network security, security capabilities of 
information systems. 
CYSEC 607 Assessment of Identity and Access
3 credits,
Prerequisites: GCYSEC 605 
This course focuses control physical and logical access, and design 
appropriate asset retention, information security controls.
CYSEC 608 Software Development and Operation Security
3 credits
Prerequisites: GCYSEC 605
This course focuses on access control, cryptography, security 
architecture and design, network security, security capabilities of 
information systems. 
GCYSEC 609 Digital Cyber Forensics
3 credits, FA-1
Prerequisites: GCYSEC 605 Asset Security and Risk Management 
This course focuses on computer and cyber forensics. Students will 
learn different aspects of computer and cybercrime and ways in 
which to uncover, protect, exploit, and document digital evidence. 
Students will be exposed to different types of tools (both software 
and hardware), techniques and procedure, and be able to use them 
to perform rudimentary forensic investigations. 
GCYSEC 610 Cryptography and Network Security
3 credits, FA-2
Prerequisites: GCYSEC 605 Asset Security and Risk Management 
This course provides theoretical and applied foundations of 
essential skills and knowledge for effectively utilizing networks 
and Internet technologies to facilitate, manage and secure 
data communications. GCYSEC reviews information network 
technologies and vulnerabilities of any network.
GCYSEC 611 Penetration Testing
3 credits
Prerequisites: GCYSEC 501 and GCYSEC 606 
This course teaches students the underlying principles and many 
of the techniques associated with the cybersecurity practice known 
as penetration testing. The course covers planning, reconnaissance, 
scanning, exploitation, post-exploitation, and result reporting. 
Students will discover how system vulnerabilities can be exploited 
and learn to avoid such problems.
GCYSEC 690-695 Special Topics in Cybersecurity
1-3 credits, per program director
Prerequisite: Specific prerequisites are topic-related
The course offers presentation of topics that are emerging as the 
field of Information Assurance and Cybersecurity change rapidly. 
The objectives and content reflect the interests of the faculty and 
the students relative to the topic.
GCIS 697 Project Continuation
1 credit
Prerequisite: Incomplete grade in GCYSEC 698 or GCYSEC 699 
or permission of the chair.
Continuation of directed project or research efforts.
3 credits
Prerequisites: GCYSEC 605
This course focuses on access control, cryptography, security 
architecture and design, network security, security capabilities of 
information systems.
GCYSEC 698 Directed Project
3-6 credits
Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of 12 credits in the MS-IAC 
program; Satisfactory Performance in GCIS 605 or equivalent. 
Successful formulation and oral defense of project proposal.
This course tracks the completion of an independent project and 
to pass a final oral examination covering the student’s project area 
and related subject areas. The content of the independent project 
to develop prototype-level application culminating in a publish-
able-quality technical report (hereafter referred to as a ‘technical 
project’).
The project content represents a researched and creative expression 
of the student’s advanced capability as a result of the graduate 
program. The directed research project must be proposed 
and approved prior to the commencement of the independent 
project work.
GCYSEC 699 Directed Research
3-6 credits
Prerequisites: Satisfactory completion of 12 credits in the MS-IAC 
program; Satisfactory Performance in GCIS 605 or equivalent. 
Successful formulation and oral defense of project proposal.
This course tracks the completion of an independent project and 
to pass a final oral examination covering the student’s project area 
and related subject areas. The content of the independent project to 
develop in-depth scholarship culminating in a publishable-quality 
manuscript (hereafter referred to as a ‘research project’) The project 
content represents a researched and creative expression of the 
student’s advanced capability as a result of the graduate program. 
The directed research project must be proposed and approved prior 
to the commencement of the independent project work.
119
Nursing
Nursing
Interim Director: Shannon Scully DNP, RN
INTRODUCTION
Upon completion of program requirements, students are awarded 
the Master of Science in Nursing (MSN) degree. The program 
integrates nursing leadership, research, and clinical practice. 
Graduates are able to respond to challenges facing nursing and 
the health care system through advanced clinical practice and 
scientific inquiry.
The MSN degree is awarded to graduates who complete require-
ments for a specific advanced practice option in an identified area 
of nursing practice. Currently, students may select from Family 
Nurse Practitioner or Nurse Anesthesia.
The master’s degree program in nursing and the post graduate 
APRN certificate program at Gannon University is accredited by 
the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www.
ccneaccrediation.org).
OUTCOMES
At the conclusion of the program of study leading to the degree of 
Master of Science in Nursing, the graduate:
1. 	Synthesizes theory and research from nursing, the biopsychosocial 
sciences, and the humanities in their advanced practice role to 
care for members of diverse populations.
2. 	Is able to conduct research, collaborate with other researchers 
from various disciplines, and implement research findings in 
practice or educational settings. 
3. 	Is able to assume the advanced practice role of administrator, 
researcher, or practitioner. 
4. 	Is prepared to assume a leadership role to influence change in 
health care practice at local, regional, and national levels.
5. 	Articulates and differentiates the various advanced practice roles 
within nursing.
6. 	Has developed an understanding of the importance of maintain-
ing professional development in their advanced practice role.
7. 	Actively engages in collaborative relationships as an advanced 
practice nurse with professionals from various disciplines and 
members of diverse populations to improve health care.
8. 	Has acquired an educational foundation for doctoral study.
PART-TIME OPPORTUNITIES IN  
THE GRADUATE NURSING PROGRAM
Opportunities for part-time study are available to students in one 
of the two program options (CRNP). Courses are scheduled three 
semesters per year (fall, spring, and summer).
NOTE: Course offerings in any graduate nursing option are 
contingent on sufficient enrollment.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Registered nurses who have a Bachelor of Science degree with a 
major in Nursing from an accredited program are eligible to apply 
for admission to graduate study. Applicants must:
•	 Submit an application for admission.
•	 Provide transcripts of all academic work. 
•	 Complete an introductory statistics course and an undergraduate 
research course with a grade of at least a “B” in both courses.
•	 Submit competitive scores from the Graduate Record Examina-
tion. Provide three letters of recommendation from individuals 
who can speak to the candidate’s academic and professional 
expertise.
•	 Provide three letters of recommendation from individuals who 
can speak to the candidate’s academic and professional expertise.
•	 Give evidence of the fulfillment of legal requirements for the 
practice of nursing in the United States.
•	 Personal interview. 
•	 GNURS 590 Advanced Physical Assessment requires skills /
competencies to be evaluated on campus, in-person (Erie or 
Ruskin, Florida) as arranged.
NOTE: Specific MSN program options may require additional 
admission criteria.
RESEARCH REQUIREMENT
Each graduate student in nursing is required to prepare a research 
study or evidence-based practice project and submit a formal 
research report prior to graduation. This requirement includes six 
credits of study – three credits of GNURS 620, and three credits of 
GNURS 651 Research Seminar. Students are guided through the 
process by a doctorally-prepared nursing faculty member.
THE CURRICULUM PLAN
The graduate nursing program requires students to complete 
42 credits. All students are required to complete six credits of 
core nursing knowledge courses – three credits of GNURS 620: 
Foundations of Research and Theoretical Frameworks in Nursing 
and three credits of GNURS 526: Role Theory and Professional 
Issues in Nursing.
120
Master of Science  
in Nursing Options
Course of Study for  
Family Nurse Practitioner 
The Family Nurse Practitioner program prepares students for the 
nurse practitioner role with experience to care for patients across 
the lifespan. Our faculty provide expertise and mentoring in 
assessment, diagnosis, and implementation of advanced practice 
care to individuals, families, and groups in the community setting. 
Ethical dilemmas and legal issues related to the advanced practice 
role are addressed. Preparation to serve as a primary care provider 
and leader in community practice is acquired from theoretical 
knowledge developed through online courses and clinical practice 
experience gained through hands-on training in diverse clinical 
settings. Students learn to conduct needs assessments to deliver a 
community-wide system of health care services.
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
(42 Total Credits)
The planned course sequence that follows is for part-time study 
and is delivered as an asynchronous online program. 
FIRST YEAR
Fall Semester – 6 credits
GNURS 526	 	
Role Theory and Professional Issues  
in Nursing 	
3
GNURS 587	 	
Advanced Pathophysiology 1	
3
Spring Semester – 6 credits
GNURS 588	 	
Advanced Pathophysiology 2	
3
GNURS 589	 	
Pharmacotherapeutics	
3
SECOND YEAR
Fall Semester – 6 credits
GNURS 620	 	
Foundations of and Theoretical  
Frameworks in Nursing	
3
GNURS 590	 	
Advanced Physical Assessment	
3
Spring Semester – 9 credits
GNURS 651 	 	
Research Seminar	
3
GNURS 660	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Theory 1	
3
GNURS 663	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Practicum 1	
3
Summer Session – 7 credits
GNURS 661	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Theory 2	
3
GNURS 664	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Practicum 2	
4
THIRD YEAR
Fall Semester – 8 credits
GNURS 662	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Theory 3	
3
GNURS 665	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Practicum 3	
5
NOTE: * indicates courses required for a Family Nurse Practitioner 
Certificate. 
Family Nurse Practitioner Certificate
For students with an earned MSN, a Family Nurse Practitioner 
Certificate may be earned by taking the 33 didactic and clinical 
course credits indicated with an asterisk. If the student has not 
completed a thesis, the research component will be required. 
Certificate students are admitted on a space-available basis.
Family Nurse Practitioner  
(Post-Graduate APRN Certificate)
INTRODUCTION
For students with an earned MSN, a Family Nurse Practitioner 
Certificate may be earned by taking the 33 didactic and clinical 
course credits.
The Family Nurse Practitioner program prepares students for the 
nurse practitioner role with experience to care for patients across 
the lifespan. Our faculty provide expertise and mentoring in 
assessment, diagnoses, and implementation of advanced practice 
care to individuals, families, and groups in the community setting. 
Ethical dilemmas and legal issues related to the advanced practice 
role are addressed. Preparation to serve as a primary care provider 
and leader in community practice is acquired from theoretical 
knowledge developed through online courses and clinical practice 
experience gained through hands-on training in diverse clinical 
settings. Students learn to conduct needs assessments to deliver a 
community-wide system of health care services.
OUTCOMES
At the conclusion of the program of study leading to the Post-
Graduate APRN Certificate, the graduate:
1.	 synthesizes theory and research from nursing, the biopsychosocial 
sciences, and the humanities in their advanced practice role to 
care for members of diverse populations.
2.	 is able to conduct research, collaborate with other researchers 
from various disciplines, and implement research findings in 
practice or educational settings.
3.	 is able to assume the advanced practice role of administrator, 
researcher, or practitioner.
4.	 is prepared to assume a leadership role to influence change in 
health care practice at local, regional, and national levels.
5.	 articulates and differentiates the various advanced practice roles 
within nursing.
6.	 has developed an understanding of the importance of maintaining 
professional development in their advanced practice role.
7.	 actively engages in collaborative relationships as an advanced 
practice nurse with professionals from various disciplines and 
members of diverse populations to improve health care.
8.	 has acquired an educational foundation for doctoral study.
 
121
Nursing
ACCREDITATION
The Family Nurse Practitioner Past-Graduate APRN Certificate 
program in nursing at Gannon University is accredited by the 
Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (http://www. 
ccneaccreditation.org).
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Registered nurses (RNs) who have a Master of Science degree with 
a major in nursing from an accredited program are eligible to apply 
for admission to graduate study.
Applicants must:
–	 submit a complete application for admission;
–	 submit official transcripts of all previous academic work;
–	 demonstrate completion of an introductory statistics course and 
a research course with a grade of at least a “B” or higher;
–	 submit competitive scores from the Graduate Record 
Examination (GRE);
–	 provide three letters of recommendation from individuals who 
can speak to the candidate’s academic and professional expertise;
–	 provide evidence of the fulfillment of legal requirements for the 
practice of nursing in the United States; and
–	 complete a successful interview with the admissions committee 
for the family nurse practitioner program.
–	 GNURS 590 Advanced Physical Assessment requires skills /
competencies to be evaluated on campus, in-person (Erie or 
Ruskin, Florida) as arranged.
THE CURRICULUM PLAN
The Family Nurse Practitioner Post-Graduate APRN Certificate 
program requires students to complete 33 credits. All students are 
required to complete six credits of core nursing knowledge courses 
– three credits of GNURS 525: Theoretical Foundations of Nursing 
and three credits of GNURS 526: Role Theory and Professional 
Issues in Nursing.
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
(33 Total Credits)
The planned course sequence that follows is for part-time study 
and is delivered as an asynchronous online program.
FIRST YEAR
Fall Semester – 3 credits
GNURS 587	 	
Advanced Pathophysiology 1	
3
Spring Semester – 6 credits
GNURS 588	 	
Advanced Pathophysiology 2	
3
GNURS 589	 	
Pharmacotherapeutics	
3
SECOND YEAR
Fall Semester – 3 credits
GNURS 590	 	
Advanced Physical Assessment	
3
Spring Semester – 3 credits
GNURS 660	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Theory 1	
3
GNURS 663	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Practicum 1	
3
Summer Session – 7 credits
GNURS 661	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Theory 2	
3
GNURS 664	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Practicum 2	
4
THIRD YEAR
Fall Semester – 8 credits
GNURS 662	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Theory 3	
3
GNURS 665 	 	
Family Nurse Practitioner Practicum 3	
5
Course of Study for  
Nurse Anesthesia
The Nurse Anesthesia option is designed to provide the professional 
nurse with an in-depth concentration in clinical anesthesia and 
prepare graduates of the program to assume the specialized role 
of nurse anesthetist. Students have the opportunity to use research, 
collaborate, and contribute effectively to the health care team’s 
efforts to provide optimal patient care. Upon completion of the 
program, students will be eligible to take the National Certification 
Exam of the National Board of Certification and Recertification for 
Nurse Anesthetists Council on Certification of Nurse Anesthetists. 
This graduate nursing option is a cooperative program between 
Gannon University and UPMC-Hamot Medical Center. Donald 
Larmon, DNP, MSN, CRNA is the director of this program.
NOTE: Students must attend full-time in this option.
This program is no longer accepting new admissions as of spring 
2021 Please see BSN-DNP Anesthesia program information.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Professional nurses who have a Bachelor of Science degree with a 
major in Nursing from an accredited program are eligible to apply 
for admission. NOTE: The Nurse Anesthesia program of study 
begins only in January. The application deadline is May 1 of 
each calendar year. Applicants seeking admission to the Nurse 
Anesthesia option must:
•	 Submit an application for admission – deadline for submission 
is May 1 for classes beginning the following January.
•	 Provide official transcripts of all academic work.
•	 Give evidence of the fulfillment of legal requirements for the 
practice of nursing in the United States.
•	 Provide evidence of having completed an introductory statistics 
course and an undergraduate research course with a grade of at 
least a “B” in both courses.
•	 Provide evidence of a cumulative GPA of 3.0 for undergraduate 
math and science courses. 
•	 Provide evidence of a cumulative GPA of 3.0 for the last 60 
hours of undergraduate nursing studies.
•	 Submit competitive scores from the Graduate Record 
Examination.
122
•	 Provide four letters of recommendation from former professors 
and employers who are able to comment on the applicant’s 
ability to successfully pursue graduate study in the nurse 
anesthesia option.
•	 Have at least two years of clinical experience in which critical 
judgments are made, i.e., critical care, prior to the May 1 
deadline.
•	 Be interviewed and selected for admission by the Gannon 
University Villa Maria School of Nursing and UPMC-Hamot 
Medical Center School of Anesthesia Admission Committee.
•	 DNURS 890 Advanced Physical Assessment requires skills /
competencies to be evaluated on campus, in-person (at Gannon 
University, Erie, PA) as arranged.
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
This program of study can only be completed on a full-time basis. 
FIRST YEAR
Spring Semester
GNURS 525	 	
Theoretical Foundations of Nursing	
3
GNURS 561 	 	
Chemistry and Physics of Anesthesia * 	
3 
GNURS 627	 	
Physiology for Anesthesia 1 *	
4
GNURS 630	 	
Advanced Physical Assessment and 
Foundations of Anesthesia Nursing 1 *	
3
GNURS 625 	 	
Pharmacology for Anesthesia 1 *	
3 
	
	 	 	
	
	
16 credits
Summer Session
GNURS 617	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 1 *	
0
GNURS 725	 	
Advanced Anesthesia Nursing 1 *	
3 
GNURS 628 	 	
Physiology for Anesthesia 2 * 	
3
GNURS 632 	 	
Advanced Physical Assessment and 
Foundations of Anesthesia Nursing 2 * 	
3
	
	 	 	
	
	
9 credits
Fall Semester
GNURS 618 	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 2 *	
0
GNURS 629 	 	
Physiology for Anesthesia 3 * 	
2
GNURS 650	 	
Research Methods	
3
GNURS 626	 	
Pharmacology for Anesthesia 2*	
3
	
	 	 	
	
	
8 credits
SECOND YEAR
Spring Semester
GNURS 526	 	
Role Theory and Professional Issues  
in Nursing	
3
GNURS 619	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 3 *	
0
GNURS 651	 	
Research Seminar	
3
GNURS 726	 	
Advanced Anesthesia Nursing 2 *	
3
	
	 	 	
	
	
9 credits
Summer Session
GNURS 717 	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 4 * 	
0
GNURS 721	 	
Thesis Guidance 	
1 
	
	 	 	
	
	
1 credit
Fall Semester
GNURS 718 	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 5 *	
0
GNURS 731 	 	
Integrated Role Seminar * 	
3
GNURS 721 	 	
Thesis Guidance	
1 
	
	 	 	
	
	
4 credits
THIRD YEAR
Spring Semester
GNURS 719 	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 6 * 	
0
GNURS 721	 	
Thesis Guidance 	
1
1 credit
Total credits: 48 
NOTE: * indicates courses required for a Nurse Anesthesia  
Certificate.
The Nurse Anesthesia program and Certificate options are also 
accredited by the Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia 
Educational Programs (COA).
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GNURS 526 Role Theory and Professional Issues in Nursing 	
3 credits
This course is a core course.
This course deals with the examination of theories underlying the 
construction and definition of roles in society, with emphasis on 
the acquisition and meaning of advanced practice nursing roles. 
Professional issues and advanced practice roles are examined for 
their interrelatedness within the health care system. Emphasis is on 
role development, leadership, and research, and how these provide 
the basis for planned change within the health care system and the 
nursing profession.
GNURS 587 Advanced Pathophysiology 1
GNURS 588 Advanced Pathophysiology 2 
3 credits each
Prerequisite: Graduate standing or permission of the program 
director. GNURS 587 is prerequisite to GNURS 588.
This two-course series is designed to provide didactic learning 
experiences that enable students to incorporate advanced 
knowledge specific to normal aging processes, physiology, and 
pathology of all major body systems into their advanced practice 
nursing role across the lifespan. 
GNURS 589 Pharmacotherapeutics
3 credits
Prerequisites: GNURS 587 and; GNURS 588 or permission of the 
program director.
This course provides an in-depth analysis of the principles of 
pharmacology for registered nurses in an advanced practice role. 
Course content identifies the clinical judgment necessary for 
identifying the appropriate drug, dose, route, frequency, duration 
of treatment and nursing interventions necessary when presented 
123
Nursing
with patients experiencing particular symptoms or disease states 
across the lifespan. In this decision-making process, patient factors 
– such as age, renal function, hepatic function, concurrent disease 
states, and current medications – as well as pharmacologic factors 
– such as pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and toxicity – are identified.
GNURS 590 Advanced Physical Assessment
3 credits
Prerequisites: GNURS 587 and GNURS 588. Graduate standing 
or permission of the program director.
This course expands nursing physical assessment skills to the 
level of advanced practice. Skills addressed include taking a 
health history, and physical, psychological, cognitive, and social 
assessments. Physical assessment skills span all age groups, but 
the focus in this course is on the adult. Advanced inspection, 
auscultation, percussion, and palpation skills are taught and 
practiced. Emphasis is on the application of knowledge specific 
to human anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology to physical 
assessment. 
GNURS 617 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 1
0 credits
Prerequisite: GNURS 630 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
The clinical Nurse Anesthesia curriculum is designed to allow 
the nurse anesthetist student to integrate didactic learning into the 
clinical practice of anesthesia. Clinical Practicum 1 provides the 
foundation for clinical practice. Basic anesthesia skills are learned 
and practiced during an appropriate orientation to clinical practice 
that precedes this initial clinical experience.
GNURS 618 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 2
0 credits
Prerequisite: GNURS 617 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
Clinical Practicum 2 builds on the basic skills learned and practiced 
in Clinical Practicum 1. It provides the nurse anesthetist student 
the opportunity to improve their basic anesthesia skills. Clinical 
Practicum 2 builds on the student’s basic anesthesia knowledge 
and comprehension. The student demonstrates the use of didactic 
knowledge learned in the classroom and skills learned in the clinical 
setting to meet the perioperative needs of patients.
GNURS 619 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 3
0 credits
Prerequisite: GNURS 618 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
Clinical Practicum 3 builds on the advanced skills learned in 
Clinical Practicum 2. It provides the nurse anesthetist student 
the opportunity to improve their basic anesthesia skills, and to 
demonstrate advanced skills. Clinical Practicum 3 builds on the 
student’s anesthesia knowledge and comprehension. The student 
demonstrates the use of didactic knowledge learned in the classroom 
and skills learned in the clinical setting to meet the perioperative 
needs of a variety of patients. Students begin to take a more active 
role in the decision-making process specific to the anesthesia needs 
of their patients.
GNURS 620 Foundations of Research and  
Theoretical Frameworks in Nursing.
3 credits
This course examines nursing theories, and that role that theoretical 
models play in providing a basis for the scientific application 
of the nursing research and the practice. Emphasis is placed on 
the systematic examination of the research process and theory 
construction, including critical analysis of research studies and 
examination of the relationship between theory, research and 
professional practice. This course provides graduate nursing 
students with the fundamental knowledge to design and conduct a 
research study utilizing a sound theoretical basis.
GNURS 625 Pharmacology for Anesthesia 1 
3 credits
Prerequisite: GNURS 561 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
This course is the first in a two-course series presenting requisite 
knowledge for the effective clinical practice of anesthesia. It 
provides in-depth knowledge specific to anesthesia pharmacology 
to nurse anesthetist students. Course content includes the 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of anesthetic agents, 
muscle relaxants, and local agents. Emphasis is on knowledge 
specific to the uptake and distribution of anesthetics, as well as 
the metabolism, excretion, and elimination of anesthetic drugs. 
GNURS 626 Pharmacology for Anesthesia 2 
3 credits
Prerequisite: GNURS 625 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
This course is the second in a two-course series for nurse anesthetist 
students presenting requisite knowledge for the effective clinical 
practice of anesthesia. Course content includes the pharmacokinetics 
and pharmacodynamics of the accessory drugs used in anesthesia 
practice. Emphasis is on drugs affecting the autonomic system, the 
central nervous system, and the cardiovascular system. 
GNURS 627 Physiology for Anesthesia 1
4 credits
Prerequisite: Graduate standing in the Nurse Anesthesia option.
Corequisites: GNURS 561 and GNURS 630
This course is the first in a three-course series for nurse anesthetist 
students. Course content presents a detailed, systematic 
investigation of the anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology of 
the cardiopulmonary system. Emphasis is on the integration of this 
knowledge into planning, implementation, and evaluation of care 
strategies for patients requiring anesthesia. 
124
GNURS 628 Physiology for Anesthesia 2
3 credits
Prerequisite: GNURS 627 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
This course is the second in a three-course series for nurse 
anesthetist students. Course content presents a detailed, systematic 
investigation of the anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology 
of the endocrine and renal systems, including fluid, electrolyte, 
and acid-base physiology. Emphasis is on the integration of this 
knowledge into planning, implementation, and evaluation of care 
strategies for patients requiring anesthesia. 
GNURS 629 Physiology for Anesthesia 3
2 credits
Prerequisite: GNURS 628 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
This course is the third in a three-course series for nurse 
anesthetist students. Course content presents a detailed, systematic 
investigation of the anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology of 
the neuromuscular system. Emphasis is on the integration of this 
knowledge into planning, implementation, and evaluation of care 
strategies for patients requiring anesthesia.
GNURS 630 Advanced Physical Assessment and  
Foundations of Anesthesia Nursing 1
3 credits
Prerequisite: Graduate standing in the Nurse Anesthesia option.
Corequisites: GNURS 561 and GNURS 627
This course is the first in a two-course series. It provides nurse 
anesthesia students with an introduction to the art and science of 
anesthesia. Course content identifies basic concepts of anesthesia 
and introduces the student to techniques and procedures specific to 
the practice of anesthesia. Reinforcement of didactic principles is 
accomplished by practice sessions in a structured laboratory setting.
GNURS 632 Advanced Physical Assessment and  
Foundations of Anesthesia Nursing 2
3 credits
Prerequisite: GNURS 630 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
This course is the second in a two-course series for nurse anesthesia 
students. Course content includes progressive, guided instruction 
in the clinical anesthesia management of patients undergoing 
obstetrical, pediatric, orthopedic, and urologic surgery. Inpatient, 
outpatient, and trauma settings are included. Legal aspects of the 
practice of anesthesia are addressed. Reinforcement of didactic 
principles continues.
GNURS 651 Research Seminar 
3 credits
Prerequisites: GNURS 620 or permission of the program director. 
This seminar provides peer and faculty support to students 
developing their graduate research proposals. The major emphasis 
includes refining an area of research, identifying a researchable 
question, exploring the literature, critiquing literature relevant to 
the research area, and determining the appropriate method to answer 
the question under investigation. The majority of seminar sessions 
are devoted to student presentations of their research plans with 
peer and faculty feedback to strengthen the proposal.
GNURS 660 Family Nurse Practitioner Theory 1
3 credits
Prerequisites: GNURS 587, GNURS 588, GNURS 589, GNURS 
590 and graduate standing in the Family Nurse Practitioner option. 
Corequisite: GNURS 663
This course presents theoretical knowledge and skills necessary 
for the nurse practitioner student to develop effective strategies 
to analyze, manage, and prevent episodic problems common to 
a specific female population – women from adolescence through 
post-menopause. The focus is on providing care to women who 
live in rural areas. 
GNURS 661 Family Nurse Practitioner Theory 2
3 credits
Prerequisites: GNURS 660, GNURS 663 and graduate standing in 
the Family Nurse Practitioner option. 
Co-requisite: GNURS 664
This course presents theoretical knowledge and skills necessary 
for the nurse practitioner student to develop nursing competency 
in rural pediatric primary care practice. Course content identifies 
strategies and interventions to assist individuals and families 
who are coping with health problems affecting an age-specific 
population – infants through adolescents. The focus is on providing 
care to infants, children, adolescents, and families who live in rural 
areas. Emphasis is on providing health promotion and disease 
prevention nursing strategies to meet the health needs of this 
patient population. 
GNURS 662 Family Nurse Practitioner Theory 3
3 credits
Prerequisites: GNURS 661, GNURS 664 and graduate standing in 
the Family Nurse Practitioner option. 
Co-requisite: GNURS 665
This course focuses on being a Family Nurse Practitioner in rural 
settings – settings that meet the health care needs of an adult and 
aging population. This focus includes health promotion, episodic 
illness care, stable chronic illness care, and awareness of dealing 
with emergency situations that can present at rural health care sites. 
Ethical dilemmas and legal issues resulting from expectations of 
nurses in this advanced practice role will be addressed. Leadership 
roles in community practice will be discussed from a theoretical 
knowledge base. Content will be presented specific to conducting 
a needs assessment in rural communities to ensure organization 
of health services that provide for stabilization and continuity of 
health care.
125
Nursing
GNURS 663 Family Nurse Practitioner Practicum 1
3 credits
Co-requisite: GNURS 660 and graduate standing in the Family 
Nurse Practitioner option. 
This practicum focuses on the clinical application of theoretical 
knowledge and skills in the development of nurse practitioner 
strategies for health promotion and management of problems 
common to women and their families. The focus is on providing 
care to women and families who live in rural communities. 
GNURS 664 Family Nurse Practitioner Practicum 2
4 credits
Co-requisite: GNURS 661 and graduate standing in the Family 
Nurse Practitioner option.
This practicum focuses on the clinical application of theoretical 
knowledge and skills in the development of nurse practitioner 
strategies for health promotion and management of problems 
common to pediatric and adolescent populations. The focus is on 
providing care to pediatric and adolescent populations in rural 
communities. 
GNURS 665 Family Nurse Practitioner Practicum 3
5 credits
Co-requisite: GNURS 662
This practicum focuses on synthesis and evaluation of nurse 
practitioner clinical experiences. The development and 
implementation of the role of family nurse practitioner in providing 
for the health care needs of individuals and families in rural 
communities is evaluated. Emphasis is on the ability of the student 
to integrate theoretical and clinical components in an ambulatory 
care setting within a rural, community-wide system.
GNURS 684 or GNURS 685 Independent Study 
1 to 3 credits 
This course is designed to provide graduate students with learning 
experiences that enable them to independently explore a specific 
area of nursing. Exploration can focus on issues related to 
education, administration, practice, legislation, or scientific inquiry. 
With input from the faculty facilitator, the student self-identifies all 
components of the experience – including outcomes and specific 
strategies to meet outcomes.
GNURS 717 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 4
0 credits
Prerequisite: GNURS 619 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
Clinical Practicum 4 builds on the advanced skills learned in 
Clinical Practicum 3. The nurse anesthesia student will be given 
the opportunity to experience more difficult cases and apply new 
learning. The student will be required to demonstrate higher levels 
of application and comprehension in clinical practice. 
GNURS 718 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 5
0 credits
Prerequisite: GNURS 717 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
Clinical Practicum 5 builds on the advanced skills learned in 
Clinical Practicum 4. It provides the nurse anesthetist student the 
opportunity to be more independent in meeting the anesthesia 
needs of their patients.
 
GNURS 719 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 6
0 credits
Prerequisite: GNURS 718 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
Clinical Practicum 6 builds on the advanced skills learned across the 
anesthesia curriculum. Nurse anesthesia students are now expected 
to be as independent as possible in the practice of anesthesia.
GNURS 725 Advanced Anesthesia Nursing 1
3 credits
Prerequisites: GNURS 632 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
This course provides content specific to the application of didactic 
information to clinical situations. Nurse anesthesia students are 
introduced to anesthesia specialties in a seminar format. Specialties 
include pediatric, cardiovascular, otolaryngolic, and anesthesia for 
uncommon disease.
GNURS 726 Advanced Anesthesia Nursing 2 
3 credits
Prerequisites: GNURS 725 and graduate standing in the Nurse 
Anesthesia option.
This course provides detailed instruction specific to the art and 
science of regional anesthesia and pain management. Reinforcement 
of didactic principles will be gained throughout the course by video, 
computer, and mannequin simulation.
GNURS 731 Integrated Role Seminar
3 credits
Prerequisite: Graduate standing in the Nurse Anesthesia option.
This course introduces the nurse anesthetist student to areas of 
professional responsibility. A wide range of topics are discussed. 
This course is designed to assist the student in analysis and evalu-
ation of their advanced practice role. Offered in the fall semester.
126
BSN-DNP 
Anesthesia 
Interim Director: Shannon Scully DNP, RN
INTRODUCTION
The Doctor of Nursing Practice with a concentration in Anesthesia 
option is designed to provide the professional nurse with an in-depth 
concentration in clinical anesthesia and prepare graduates of the 
program to assume the specialized role of nurse anesthetist. The 
Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) curriculum prepares students 
as leaders in their practice area. This option is a cooperative one 
between Gannon University and the UPMC Hamot School of Anes-
thesia, and complies with required educational changes, as outlined 
by the American Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN) 
and the Council on Accreditation of Nurse Anesthesia Programs 
(COA). The curriculum of the UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia/
Gannon University was developed to uphold the program’s mis-
sion to create a center of excellence for the advancement of nurse 
anesthesia education and clinical practice. Course content directs 
the DNP student to prepare, deliver and evaluate an evidence-based 
practice project in the clinical arena. This project is an immersion 
experience and not a research dissertation.
Upon completion of the program, students will be eligible to take 
the National Board of Certification and Recertification for Nurse 
Anesthetists (NBCRNA) examination required for certification 
as a CRNA.
OUTCOMES
At the conclusion of the course of study leading to the Doctor of 
Nursing Practice at Gannon University, the graduates will: 
•	 be prepared in advanced nursing practice as culturally sensitive, 
competent, and safe practitioners and who deliver care and act 
as advocates for individuals, aggregates, and communities of 
varying diversity and socioeconomic levels. 
•	 effectively use technology, large aggregate databases, and 
information systems to identify, use, and create therapeutic 
nursing interventions that promote health and prevent disease.
•	 identify, analyze, and create evidence-based solutions to 
individual practice and organizational health care dilemmas.
•	 synthesize and utilize ethical, legal, political, and advocacy 
methodologies to positively impact health care practice and 
health care delivery systems. 
•	 promote collaborative and multidisciplinary delivery of health 
care as members of teams and organizations across the health 
care practice arena. • provide quality nursing leadership and 
serve as mentors to other nurses, from novice nurses to nurses 
in advanced practice roles.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Professional nurses who have a Bachelor of Science degree with a 
major in Nursing (BSN) from an accredited program in the United 
States are eligible to apply for admission.
Provide transcripts of all academic work including an official 
transcript from each institution attended. Academic transcripts 
must support the following statements:
Candidates should have completed a graduate level statistics course 
and an undergraduate nursing research course with a grade of at 
least a B in both courses. The graduate level statistics course can 
be completed before the first semester of study or admitted students 
may choose to enroll in the graduate statistics course in the first 
summer semester as a co-requisite.
Completed an introductory statistics course and an undergraduate 
nursing research course with a grade of at least a B in both courses.
Cumulative GPA of 3.0 for undergraduate math and science courses.
Cumulative GPA of 3.0 for the last 60 hours of undergraduate 
nursing studies.
Provide evidence of the fulfillment of legal requirements for the 
practice of nursing in the United States including one copy of each 
of the following items:
•	 Nursing license
•	 PALS certification
•	 ACLS certification
•	 BCLS certification
Applicants must have two years recent full-time critical care 
experience and submit competitive scores from the Graduate 
Record Examination.
DNURS 890 Advanced Physical Assessment requires skills /
competencies to be evaluated on campus, in-person (at Gannon 
University, Erie, PA) as arranged.
THE CURRICULUM PLAN
REQUIRED COURSES  
FOR BSN-DNP PROGRAM STUDY
FIRST YEAR
Summer Semester (May-August) All Online
DNURS 826	 	
Role Theory and Professional Issues  
in Nursing	
3
DNURS 820	 	
Foundations of Research and  
Theoretical Frameworks in Nursing	
3
DNURS 861	 	
Chemistry and Physics for Anesthesia 1	
3
127
BSN-DNP Anesthesia
Fall Semester (August-December) All Online
DNURS 801	 	
Evidence-Based Practice/Theory	
3
DNURS 805	 	
Epidemiology and the role of the  
Advanced Practice Nurse	
3
DNURS 806	 	
Health Care Informatics	
3
DNURS 825	 	
Advanced Pharmacology for Anesthesia 1 	
3
Spring Semester (January-May)
DNURS 827	 	
Advanced Physiology 
Pathophysiology for Anesthesia 1	
4
DNURS 830	 	
Basic and Advanced Principles  
in Nurse Anesthesia 1	
4
DNURS 890	 	
Advanced Physical Assessment	
3
DNURS 836	 	
Advanced Pharmacology for Anesthesia 2	
3
DNURS 802	 	
Transcultural Influences on Health Care 
(Online)	
3
SECOND YEAR
Summer Semester (May-August)
DNURS 828	 	
Advanced Physiology/ 
Pathophysiology for Anesthesia 2	
3
DNURS 832	 	
Basic and Advanced Principles  
in Nurse Anesthesia 2	
4
DNURS 835	 	
Basic and Advanced Principles  
in Nurse Anesthesia 3	
3
DNURS 817	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 1	
1
Fall Semester (August-December)
DNURS 829	 	
Advanced Physiology/Pathophysiology  
for Anesthesia 3	
2
DNURS 818	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 2	
2
DNURS 803	 	
Leadership and Health Policy (Online)	
3
Spring Semester (January-May)
DNURS 840	 	
Basic and Advanced Principles  
in Nurse Anesthesia 4	
3
DNURS 819	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 3	
2
DNURS 804	 	
Scientific Underpinnings of  
Advanced Practice Nursing (Online)	
3
DNURS 831	 	
Professional Practice Issues  
in Nurse Anesthesia	
3
THIRD YEAR
Summer Semester (May-August)
DNURS 837	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 4	
2
DNURS 808	 	
Evidence Based Project/ 
Specialty Practice Implementation 	
3
Fall Semester (August-December)
DNURS 838	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 5	
2
DNURS 809	 	
Evidence Based Project/ 
Specialty Practice Dissemination	
2
Spring Semester (January-May)
DNURS 839	 	
Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 6	
2
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
DNURS 801 Evidence-Based Practice/Theory
3 credits
Emphasis is on the use of evidence on the delivery of health care 
and the measurement of outcomes in advanced nursing practice. 
Methods to improve practice, identify and test interventions and 
health care delivery models, and evaluate health care outcomes will 
be explored. Content provides a synthesis of best research evidence 
with clinical expertise and client values to direct practice for the 
best health care outcomes.
DNURS 802 Transcultural Influences on Health Care
3 credits
This course emphasizes the impact of culture, belief systems, 
and societal norms on the delivery of health care for diverse 
populations. Diversity is studied in relation to roles, expectations, 
and social organization. Emphasized are the tools necessary to 
acquire the knowledge and skills to demonstrate culturally aware 
communication and cultural assessment which will identify 
strategies for enhancing health outcomes of ill and well patients, 
families, and communities. Transcultural nursing concepts, theories 
and models will be applied to the analysis of health disparities 
and health care trends and issues across the lifespan. This course 
includes a 40-hour clinical project.
DNURS 803 Leadership and Health Policy
3 credits
This course is designed to identify the impact of leadership on 
organizational, professional, and governmental policies in nursing 
practice. It includes an overview of how health care changes affect 
the structure and cost of care in the United States at the local, 
state, and national levels. Leadership is fundamental to Doctor 
of Nursing (DNP) practice. This course will prepare students to 
analyze and develop practice processes and outcomes that improve 
quality outcomes, patient safety, and their implications. Teams and 
interprofessional collaboration will be examined to effect quality 
outcomes. Students will synthesize the impact of budget and 
finance on strategic planning and influence health policy makers to 
evaluate and improve health care delivery systems at a local, state, 
or national level. This course includes a 40-hour clinical project.
DNURS 804 Scientific Underpinnings  
of Advanced Nursing Practice
3 credits
The DNP student will explore the evolution and application of 
knowledge in nursing. This course will emphasize the acquisition 
of knowledge, the theoretical underpinnings of nursing and the 
transference of knowledge to the practice of nursing. To effect 
changes in nursing and health care of the individual, family 
and community, the joining of theory and practice are explored 
within the context of other scientific disciplines and clinical 
nursing practice.
128
DNURS 805 Epidemiology and the Role  
of the Advanced Practice Nurse
3 credits
This course explores the distribution and determinants of health-
related states and events in populations, and the application of 
findings to the control of health problems. Identifying health 
care needs and trends based on epidemiological data in a specific 
population will be used to examine ways to ensure that health care 
needs are being met – and improved. Clinical doctorate nursing 
students will be given the knowledge necessary to identify – and 
effectively use – epidemiologic database systems and trends in 
health care data.
DNURS 806 Health Care Informatics
3 credits
This course focuses on the role that information technology has as 
a support of patient-centered care – from individual to population-
focused care. Topics covered include electronic medical records 
[EMRs]; patient safety systems, tele-health modalities, from remote 
monitoring in hospital settings – such as intensive care units [ICUs] 
– to remote monitoring in patient homes; and web-based patient 
and professional education opportunities. Clinical doctorate nursing 
students will select, design, use, and evaluate a health information 
modality at the system level. Students will identify ethical issues 
in information management and the use of technology used to 
evaluate and research evidence-based issues.
DNURS 808 Evidence-Based Project/ 
Specialty Practicum Implementation
3 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 801 and 804.
This clinical practicum implementation requires the student to be 
precepted by research or Doctorally prepared mentor in a practice 
specialty area of their choice for a total of 224 hours over the 
course of the semester. Concepts across the program of study, 
from all didactic and clinical experiences, will culminate in an 
evidence-based change project. Practice settings can be varied, 
and can include clinical, governmental, or educational settings. 
Students will disseminate their project in a poster presentation in 
the clinical and the educational arena.
DNURS 809 Evidence-Based Project/ 
Specialty Practicum Dissemination
2 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 801, 804, and 808.
This clinical practicum dissemination requires the student to be 
precepted by research or Doctorally prepared mentor in a practice 
specialty area of their choice. Concepts across the program of 
study, from all didactic and clinical experiences, will culminate in 
an evidence-based change project. Practice settings cane be varied, 
and can include clinical, governmental, or educational settings. 
Students will disseminate their project in a poster presentation in 
the clinical and educational arena.
DNURS 817 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum I
1 credit
Prerequisites: DNURS 830. 
The clinical Nurse Anesthesia curriculum is designed to allow 
the nurse anesthetist student to integrate didactic learning into the 
clinical practice of anesthesia. Clinical Practicum 1 provides the 
foundation for clinical practice. Basic anesthesia skills are learned 
and practiced during an appropriate orientation to clinical practice 
that precedes this initial clinical experience.
DNURS 818 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 2
2 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 817. 
Clinical Practicum 2 builds on the skills learned and practiced 
in Clinical Practicum 1. It provides the nurse anesthetist student 
with the opportunity to improve anesthesia skills. Clinical 
Practicum 2 builds on the student’s basic anesthesia knowledge and 
integration of evidence-based principles. The student will learn and 
demonstrate how to interact in a manner that assures compassionate 
and culturally appropriate care. 
DNURS 819 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 3
2 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 818. 
Clinical Practicum 3 builds on the advanced skills learned in 
Clinical Practicum 2. It provides the nurse anesthetist student 
the opportunity to improve their basic anesthesia skills, and to 
demonstrate advanced skills. Clinical Practicum 3 builds on the 
student’s anesthesia knowledge and comprehension. The student 
demonstrates the use of didactic knowledge learned in the classroom 
and skills learned in the clinical setting to meet the perioperative 
needs of a variety of patients. Students begin to take a more active 
role in the decision-making process specific to the anesthesia needs 
of the patient.
DNURS 820 Foundations of Research and Theoretical 
Frameworks in Nursing
3 credits 
This course examines nursing theories, and that role that theoretical 
models play in providing a basis for the scientific application 
of the nursing research and the practice. Emphasis is placed on 
the systematic examination of the research process and theory 
construction, including critical analysis of research studies and 
examination of the relationship between theory, research, and 
professional practice. This course provides graduate nursing 
students with the fundamental knowledge to design and conduct a 
research study utilizing a sound theoretical basis.
DNURS 825 Advanced Pharmacology for Anesthesia 1
3 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 861. 
This course is the first in a two-course series presenting requisite 
knowledge for the effective clinical practice of anesthesia. It 
provides in-depth knowledge specific to anesthesia pharmacology 
to nurse anesthetist students. Course content includes the 
129
BSN-DNP Anesthesia
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of anesthetic agents, 
muscle relaxants, and local anesthetics. Emphasis is on building 
knowledge specific to the uptake and distribution of anesthetics, 
as well as the metabolism, excretion, and elimination of anesthetic 
drugs. Review of current trends in pharmacy related to anesthesia 
provide evidence-based learning opportunities.
DNURS 826 Role Theory and Professional Issues in Nursing
3 credits
This course deals with the examination of theories underlying the 
construction and definition of roles in society, with emphasis on 
the acquisition and meaning of advanced practice nursing roles. 
Professional issues and advanced practice roles are examined for 
their interrelatedness within the health care system. Emphasis is on 
role development, leadership, and research, and how these provide 
the basis for planned change within the health care system and the 
nursing profession. 
DNURS 827 Advanced Physiology/ 
Pathophysiology for Anesthesia 1 
4 credits 
This course is the first in a three-course series for nurse anesthetist 
students. Course content presents a detailed, systematic 
investigation of the anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology 
of the cardiopulmonary system. Emphasis is on the integration of 
this knowledge into planning, implementation, and evaluation of 
care strategies for patients requiring anesthesia. Differentiation 
of normal and abnormal findings and prioritizing patient specific 
needs provides the foundation for the development of evidenced 
based plan of care.
DNURS 828 Advanced Physiology/ 
Pathophysiology for Anesthesia 2
3 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 827. 
This course is the second in a three-course series for nurse 
anesthetist students. This course will emphasize the acquisition of 
knowledge and the transference of knowledge into practice. Course 
content presents a detailed, systematic investigation of anatomy, 
physiology, and pathophysiology of the Endocrine and Renal 
Systems, including fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base physiology. 
Emphasis is on the integration of evidence-based principles into 
the planning, implementation, and evaluation of care strategies for 
patients requiring anesthesia.
DNURS 829 Advanced Physiology/ 
Pathophysiology for Anesthesia 3
2 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 828. 
This course is the third in a three-course series for nurse anesthesia 
students. This course will emphasize the acquisition of knowledge 
and the transference of knowledge into practice. Course content 
presents a detailed, systematic investigation of the anatomy, 
physiology, and pathophysiology of the neuromuscular system. 
Emphasis is on the integration of evidence-based principles into 
the planning, implementation, and evaluation of care strategies for 
patients requiring anesthesia.
DNURS 830 Basic and Advanced Principles  
in Nurse Anesthesia 1
4 credits Lab/Observation
The first course in nurse anesthesia combines classroom lectures, 
simulation training, and observation in the operating room. This 
basic course emphasizes the knowledge and skills of the nurse 
anesthetist in providing evidence-based care. Basic concepts of 
the role and responsibilities of nurse anesthetists are presented. 
Didactic principles are reinforced in a structured simulation 
experience including air way management, anesthetic gas machine 
overview and safety mechanisms, monitoring, positioning, fluid 
management and identification of potential mechanical and 
anesthesia complications.
DNURS 831 Professional Practice Issues in Nurse Anesthesia
3 credits
The emphasis of this course is the professional practice issues 
specific to the nurse anesthetist. This course exposes the student 
registered nurse anesthetist to current areas of professional 
responsibility through a variety of lectures and guest speakers. A 
wide range of topics are discussed, including professional aspects of 
the advanced practice CRNA, the business of anesthesia, the current 
healthcare environment, healthcare politics, credentialing, quality, 
and regulation of practice. The course is designed to assist the 
student to conceptualize, analyze, and evaluate their professional 
role. This course will prepare students to analyze and develop 
practice processes and outcomes that improve quality outcomes, 
patient safety and their implications.
DNURS 832 Basic and Advanced Principles  
in Nurse Anesthesia 2
4 credits Lab
Prerequisites: DNURS 830. 
This course is the second in a two-course series which builds 
upon and intensifies to include the care of diverse populations. 
Identifying health care needs based upon specific populations 
will be used to examine ways to ensure that health care needs are 
being anticipated, met, and improved. In-depth content in both 
the classroom and simulation lab includes progressive, guided 
instruction in the evidence based clinical anesthesia management of 
patients undergoing obstetrical, orthopedic, trauma and urological 
surgery. Principles of nurse anesthesia care in a variety of settings 
explore the legal and ethical considerations of nurse anesthesia.
130
DNURS 835 Basic and Advanced Principles  
in Nurse Anesthesia 3
3 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 830. 
This course is the third course in the series which builds upon 
and intensifies to include the care of pediatric and cardiovascular 
patients. Identifying health care needs based upon specific 
populations will be used to examine ways to ensure that health 
care needs are being anticipated, met, and improved. This course 
provides content to break down didactic information assess 
clinical situations and design evidence-based plans of care. Nurse 
anesthesia students are introduced to anesthesia specialists in a 
seminar format.
DNURS 836 Advanced Pharmacology for Anesthesia 2
3 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 825. 
This course is the second in a two-course series for nurse anesthetist 
students presenting requisite knowledge for the effective clinical 
practice of anesthesia. Course content includes pharmacokinetics 
and pharmacodynamics of the accessory drugs for anesthesia 
practice. Emphasis is on drug affecting the autonomic system, the 
central nervous system, and the cardiovascular system. Fluid and 
electrolyte management, antibiotic prophylaxis, and pharmacology 
for pulmonary and endocrine systems are reviewed. Student 
registered nurse anesthetist demonstrate learned information in 
clinical practice.
DNURS 837 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 4
2 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 819. 
Clinical Practicum 4 builds on the advanced skills learned in 
Clinical Practicum 3. The nurse anesthesia student will be given 
the opportunity to experience more difficult cases and apply new 
learning. The student will be required to demonstrate higher levels 
of application and critical thinking in clinical practice.
DNURS 838 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 5
2 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 837. 
Clinical Practicum 5 builds on the advanced skills learned in 
Clinical Practicum 4. It provides the nurse anesthesia student with 
the opportunity to experience more difficult cases and apply new 
learning. The student will be required to demonstrate higher levels 
of application and critical thinking in clinical practice.
DNURS 839 Anesthesia Clinical Practicum 6
2 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 838. 
Clinical Practicum 6 builds on the advanced skills learned across the 
anesthesia curriculum. Nurse anesthesia students are now expected 
to be as independent as possible in the practice of anesthesia. 
DNURS 840 Basic and Advanced Principles  
in Nurse Anesthesia 4
3 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 835.
The fourth and final course in the series continues to build upon 
and intensifies to include the care of diverse populations. This 
course provides content specific to the application of didactic 
and evidence-based principles to clinical situations. Anesthesia 
specialties surveyed include otorhinolaryngologic, bariatrics, burns, 
ophthalmic, cancer, uncommon diseases, and pain management 
Identifying health care needs based upon specific populations 
will be used to examine ways to ensure that health care needs are 
being anticipated, met, and improved. Nurse anesthesia students 
are introduced to anesthesia specialists in a seminar format which 
promotes interdisciplinary collaboration.
DNURS 861 Chemistry and Physics for Anesthesia 
3 credits
This course emphasizes chemistry and physics and investigates 
basic physical principles as they relate to clinical nurse anesthesia 
practice. This course identifies mechanics, fluids, gases, electricity, 
electronics, and instruments as they relate to anesthesia. Students 
will be given the knowledge needed to identify and use principles 
of chemistry and physics to positively impact the practice of nurse 
anesthesia that improve quality outcomes and patient safety.
DNURS 890 Advanced Physical Assessment
3 credits
This course is intended to expand nursing history and physical 
assessment skills including health history taking, physical, 
psychological, cognitive, and social assessment. Focus is given 
to the assessment skills for evaluating the adult with reference 
to various techniques and findings found in the younger and 
older populations. Application of anatomy, physiology, and 
pathophysiology to physical appraisal is emphasized.
131
Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP)
Doctor of Nursing 
Practice (DNP)
Interim Director: Shannon Scully, DNP, RN
INTRODUCTION
Upon completion of the program requirements, students are 
awarded the Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP) degree. To comply 
with required educational changes as outlined by the American 
Association of Colleges of Nursing (AACN), the Villa Maria 
School of Nursing is offering the addition of courses that will meet 
identified core content and competencies as outlined by the AACN 
specific to the practice doctorate.
The program is offered as a “bridge program” or Master’s add-on 
from the MSN to the DNP that is 23-26 credits in length. It can be 
completed in four to six part-time semesters.
Graduates will be prepared as leaders in their practice area. Course 
content will direct the DNP student at Gannon University to 
prepare, deliver and evaluate an evidence-based practice project 
in the clinical arena. This project will be an immersion experience 
and is not a research dissertation. Students may use their previous 
MSN level thesis work as a pilot study or starting point to develop 
their project.
OUTCOMES
At the conclusion of the course of study leading to the Doctor of 
Nursing Practice at Gannon University, the graduates will:
•	 be prepared in advanced nursing practice as culturally sensitive, 
competent, and safe practitioners and who deliver care and act 
as advocates for individuals, aggregates, and communities of 
varying diversity and socioeconomic levels.
•	 effectively use technology, large aggregate data bases, and 
information systems to identify, use, and create therapeutic 
nursing interventions that promote health and prevent disease.
•	 identify, analyze, and create evidence-based solutions to 
individual practice and organizational health care dilemmas.
•	 synthesize and utilize ethical, legal, political, and advocacy 
methodologies to positively impact health care practice and 
health care delivery systems.
•	 promote collaborative and multidisciplinary delivery of health 
care as members of teams and organizations across the health 
care practice arena.
•	 provide quality nursing leadership and serve as mentors to other 
nurses, from novice nurses to nurses in advanced practice roles.
NOTE: Course offerings in any graduate program nursing option 
are contingent on sufficient enrollment.
 
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Applicants who hold a Master of Science in Nursing are eligible 
to apply for admission to the Doctor of Nursing Practice program 
of study. Applicants must:
•	 Submit an application for admission with the Gannon University 
Graduate Admissions office. Applicants will:
	
–		 Provide official transcripts of all previous academic work.
	
–		 Have a 3.5 out of 4.0 overall GPA in their Master’s degree 
program.
	
–		 Submit three letters of recommendation; one from an aca-
demic professional (faculty who knows the student’s ability 
to do independent academic work), one from an employer, 
and one from a professional who can address the candidate’s 
advanced practice ability.
	
–		 A professional resume
	
–		 A copy of a current Registered Nurse license and advanced 
practice license (where applicable)
	
–		 Evidence of active certification and current CEUs
	
–		 Course description of a Graduate level statistics course (if 
completed)
	
–		 A synopsis or evidence of a thesis or evidence-based practice 
project completed at the Master’s level
	
–		 An essay (limited to 500 words) regarding the applicant’s 
interest in obtaining a DNP
	
–		 Complete a phone or onsite interview with VMSON leader-
ship.
	
–		 Provide information regarding clinical practice hours 
acquired for evaluation to meet the 1000 hour DNP clinical 
requirement 
THE CURRICULUM PLAN
A three-credit graduate level statistics course must be completed 
prior to or concurrent with taking DNURS 801 Evidence based 
Practice/Theory. If the course is not taken at Gannon, a course 
description must be approved by the Nursing Director. Graduate 
students are assigned an academic advisor who will provide 
guidance and support throughout the DNP program.
REQUIRED COURSES FOR DNP PROGRAM OF STUDY
Fall Semester
DNURS 801	 	
Evidence Based Practice/ Theory	
3
DNURS 802	 	
Transcultural Influences on Health Care 
(40 hour clinical project)	
3
Spring Semester
DNURS 804	 	
Scientific Underpinnings of APN*	
3
DNURS 803	 	
Leadership and Health Policy  
(40 hour clinical project) *	
3
Summer Session
DNURS 806	 	
Health Care Informatics	
3
DNURS 808	 	
Evidence Based Practice/Specialty  
Practicum Project Implementation	
3
132
Fall Semester
DNURS 805	 	
Epidemiology and the Role of the  
Clinical Nurse Doctorate	
3
DNURS 809	 	
Evidence Based Practice/Specialty  
Practicum Project Dissemination	
2
* All students must complete a minimum of 304 clinical practice 
hours (40 + 40 + 224 hours = 304 hours); All post-BSN and post-
MSN clinical certification hours will be evaluated for a total of 
1000 post-BSN clinical hours
* DNURS 803 must be a prerequisite or co-requisite with DNURS 
804.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
DNURS 801 Evidence-Based Practice/Theory 
3 credits
Emphasis is on the use of evidence on the delivery of health care 
and the measurement of outcomes in advanced nursing practice. 
Methods to improve practice, identify and test interventions and 
health care delivery models, and evaluate health care outcomes will 
be explored. Content provides a synthesis of best research evidence 
with clinical expertise and client values to direct practice for the 
best health care outcomes.
DNURS 802 Transcultural Influences on Health Care
3 credits
This course emphasizes the impact of culture, belief systems, 
and societal norms on the delivery of health care for diverse 
populations. Diversity is studied in relation to roles, expectations, 
and social organization. Emphasized are the tools necessary to 
acquire the knowledge and skills to demonstrate culturally aware 
communication and cultural assessment which will identify 
strategies for enhancing health outcomes of ill and well patients, 
families, and communities. Transcultural nursing concepts, theories 
and models will be applied to the analysis of health disparities 
and health care trends and issues across the lifespan. This course 
includes a 40-hour clinical project.
DNURS 803 Leadership and Health Policy
3 credits
This course is designed to identify the impact of leadership on 
organizational, professional, and governmental policies in nursing 
practice. It includes an overview of how health care changes affect 
the structure and cost of care in the United States at the local, 
state, and national levels. Leadership is fundamental to Doctor 
of Nursing (DNP) practice. This course will prepare students to 
analyze and develop practice processes and outcomes that improve 
quality outcomes, patient safety, and their implications. Teams and 
interprofessional collaboration will be examined to effect quality 
outcomes. Students will synthesize the impact of budget and 
finance on strategic planning and influence health policy makers to 
evaluate and improve health care delivery systems at a local, state, 
or national level. This course includes a 40-hour clinical project.
DNURS 804 Scientific Underpinnings of  
Advanced Nursing Practice
3 credits
Prerequisite: DNURS 801
Prerequisite of Corequisite: DNURS 803
The DNP student will explore the evolution and application of 
knowledge in nursing. This course will emphasize the acquisition 
of knowledge, the theoretical underpinnings of nursing and the 
transference of knowledge to the practice of nursing. To effect 
changes in nursing and health care of the individual, family and 
community, the joining of theory and practice are explored within 
the context of other scientific disciplines and clinical nursing 
practice.
DNURS 805 Epidemiology and the Role  
of the Advanced Practice Nurse 
3 credits
This course explores the distribution and determinants of health-
related states and events in populations, and the application of 
findings to the control of health problems. Identifying health 
care needs and trends based on epidemiological data in a specific 
population will be used to examine ways to ensure that health care 
needs are being met – and improved. Clinical doctorate nursing 
students will be given the knowledge necessary to identify – and 
effectively use – epidemiologic database systems and trends in 
health care data.
DNURS 806 Health Care Informatics
3 credits
This course focuses on the role that information technology has as 
a support of patient-centered care – from individual to population-
focused care. Topics covered include electronic medical records 
[EMRs]; patient safety systems, tele-health modalities, from remote 
monitoring in hospital settings – such as intensive care units [ICUs] 
– to remote monitoring in patient homes; and web based patient 
and professional education opportunities. Clinical doctorate nursing 
students will select, design, use, and evaluate a health information 
modality at the system level. Students will identify ethical issues 
in information management and the use of technology used to 
evaluate and research evidence-based issues.
DNURS 808 Evidence-Based Practice/Specialty  
Practicum Project Implementation
3 credits
Prerequisite: DNURS 801, 804 in the part-time sequence. 
This clinical practicum implementation requires the student to be 
precepted by a research or Doctoral-prepared mentor in a practice 
specialty area of their choice for a total 224 hours over the course 
of the semester. Concepts across the program of study, from all 
didactic and clinical experiences, will culminate in an evidence-
based change project. Practice settings can be varied, and can 
include clinical, governmental, or educational settings. Students 
will disseminate their project in a poster presentation in the clinical 
and the educational arena.
133
Occupational Therapy
DNURS 809 Evidence-Based Practice/Specialty  
Practicum Project Dissemination
2 credits
Prerequisites: DNURS 801, 804, 808 in the part-time sequence
This clinical practicum dissemination requires the student to be 
precepted by a research or Doctorally prepared mentor in a practice 
specialty area of their choice. Concepts across the program of 
study, from all didactic and clinical experiences, will culminate in 
an evidence-based change project. Practice settings cane be varied, 
and can include clinical, governmental, or educational settings. 
Students will disseminate their project in a poster presentation in 
the clinical and educational arena.
DNURS 810 Special Topics
1-6 credits
The designation of a course as a “Special Topic” enables faculty 
in the Villa Maria School of Nursing to offer seminars, courses, 
or additional clinical experiences. Requests for special topic 
courses can be initiated by DNP students or faculty to complete 
program requirements. The syllabus and course objectives will be 
negotiated between student and faculty on an individual basis to 
meet student needs.
Occupational 
Therapy
Program Director: Amy Brzuz, OTD, OTR/L
INTRODUCTION
While we transition to our entry level OTD program, we will no 
longer be accepting applications for post baccalaureate entry 
into the Master of Science OT Program.
The Occupational Therapy Program offers opportunities for in-
depth study of, and clinical experiences with, clients of all ages 
who have limited capacity to perform to their expectations in their 
everyday lives or are at risk of developing a limiting condition. 
The goal of occupational therapy is to assist individuals to achieve 
their maximum level of independent living and quality of life 
through remediation of, adaptation to, or prevention of physical, 
cognitive, perceptual or mental health functional limitations. 
Occupational therapy utilizes the consultative process in addition 
to direct intervention and works with populations and systems as 
well as individuals.
MISSION
The Occupational Therapy Program engages students in teaching 
and learning to enable them to demonstrate excellence in all aspects 
of the evaluation and intervention. This process is grounded in the 
application of occupation, and the use of reasoning and creative 
problem solving. The program is designed to foster life-long 
learners who: 
•	 adapt to ever-changing professional environments,
•	 contribute to the knowledge base of the profession,
•	 provide leadership in the profession and society,
•	 acknowledge the importance of holism in their own lives and 
in the lives of their clients, 
•	 work collaboratively, respecting diversity within the global 
community, and
•	 value engagement and involvement within the community.
Gannon’s Occupational Therapy program is reflective of and 
consistent with the University Mission in preparing our students 
to be global citizens by emphasizing a strong foundation in 
liberal studies and a dynamic program curriculum that promotes 
professionalism and experiential learning. Inspired by the Catholic 
Intellectual Tradition, students receive a value centered and 
ethically based approach to life and learning, that emphasizes faith, 
leadership, inclusiveness, and social responsibility. 
134
Every occupational therapy faculty member is committed to excel-
lence and continuous advancement in teaching, scholarship, and 
service. The faculty as a whole is committed to supporting Univer-
sity and professional commitments in these three areas to prompt 
and promote excellence in the Occupational Therapy program.
GOALS OF THE PROGRAM
The goals of the Occupational Therapy program reflect the missions 
of the university, college, and program. In essence, these are to 
educate self-directed students who, upon graduation, will become 
quality professionals, contribute to the body of knowledge of the 
profession and provide leadership for the profession and society. 
This will be accomplished through incorporation of the liberal 
studies component of the student’s bachelor’s degree into graduate, 
professional education in Occupational Therapy. Accordingly, the 
goals of the program are to: 
•	 develop quality entry-level occupational therapists whose 
practice is guided by occupational science and clinical reasoning;
•	 create life-long learners who will contribute to the body of 
knowledge of the profession;
•	 foster student attitudes and professional behaviors consistent 
with the missions of the university, college and program;
•	 assist the student to develop the skills necessary to provide 
leadership roles in the profession and society;
•	 provide students with the skills and problem-solving abilities to 
adapt and respond proactively to a changing health care system 
and society;
•	 provide professional resources, services, leadership and 
scholarship to the profession and community;
•	 foster an academic community in which its members participate 
actively in the development of self and society.
PROGRAM OF STUDY 
The post-baccalaureate program of study begins in the summer 
semester of the entering year with three required and foundational 
OT courses done in an online distance education format. Full-time, 
on-campus graduate course work starts in the fall semester and 
continues for three (3) years, with the summer between the first and 
second years off. The summer and fall semesters of the third year 
are spent in full-time clinical internships, followed by a capstone 
semester in the spring. (See the Curriculum below.)
Upon completion of the program a Master of Science degree is 
awarded and graduates are eligible to sit for the national certification 
examination administered by the National Board of Certification 
in Occupational Therapy (NBCOT; www.nbcot.org). Individuals 
with certain types of criminal records (felonies) may be barred 
from practicing occupational therapy at the national or state level. 
Individuals with criminal records should contact NBCOT (http://
www.nbcot.org) and the occupational therapy licensing board of 
the state where they would like to practice prior to applying for 
admission to any OT program. Both of these organizations will do 
early evaluations of the criminal record as a means of determining 
if the student would be allowed to practice occupational therapy.
Clinical Experiences  
(Fieldwork I and Fieldwork II)
Fieldwork I: Earlier clinical experiences, which include up to 40 
hour weekly or week-long experiences in the clinic, are provided 
locally or within a reasonable proximity to the student’s permanent 
residence. Each of three Fieldwork I experiences are a component 
of professional level course requirements for Psychosocial OT, 
Pediatric OT, and Physical Disability OT courses in the curriculum. 
The occupational therapy programs also offers international level 
1 opportunities (GIFT Courses).
Fieldwork II: Clinical placements for the two 12-week full-time, 
clinical field work experiences are available throughout the United 
States, although most are located in Pennsylvania, New York 
and Ohio.
Thesis Requirements
Students are guided in their selection of a thesis topic and in the 
successful completion of the thesis experience. Students participate 
in a small group, original research project with a faculty mentor, 
which culminates in multiple presentations of their thesis.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
The program is designed as a full-time course of study, although 
part-time study may be designed with the student in special 
circumstances and with the Program Chair’s approval.
Students in the final year of completion of a bachelor’s degree are 
accepted into the program with a minimum 3.0 out of a 4.0 scale 
grade point average in college courses. GRE’s are not required. 
Transfer credit for prerequisite courses will be completed on an 
individual basis but all transfer courses must be completed at a 
“C” or higher level. Students may be accepted into the program 
contingent upon satisfactory completion of prerequisites at another 
university or may be accepted directly into the OT program if 
completing prerequisites at Gannon.
The following prerequisites must be completed before formal 
matriculation into the OT program: 
•	 Intro to Psychology
•	 Psychopathology or Abnormal Psychology
•	 Intro to Sociology or a course in diversity
•	 Anatomy and Physiology I and II with lab (total of 8 credits)
•	 Developmental psychology or equivalent
•	 Physics (one semester survey or two semester full sequence)
•	 Statistics
* Additional requirements for all students 
•	 Prior to matriculation in the program, students must complete 
their bachelor’s degree and a minimum of 40 hours of 
observation in an OT setting; two different sites are preferred. 
After completing the hours the student must obtain signed 
verification from the facility that includes student’s name, dates 
of observation, and number of hours completed.
135
Occupational Therapy
•	 Deadline for application is January 15; applications received 
after this deadline will be reviewed if space is available in the 
program.
•	 Interested students must complete the application form required 
by OTCAS.
•	 Students must have demonstrated efficiency in using tools 
common to distance education. This might include a learning 
platform, special courses, or job experience. Students taking an 
online course at Gannon University will require internet access 
to utilize Blackboard for their coursework. Blackboard can be 
found in the http://my.gannon.edu portal. Blackboard supports 
the latest versions of Internet Explorer, Safari, Mozilla Firefox, 
and Chrome. 
FINANCIAL AID
The program confers scholarships in the final two semesters of 
the program. Awards are based upon academic performance, 
professional behaviors, and leadership/career potential. Student 
worker positions may be available in the final semester of the 
program. Graduate students at Gannon may also apply as Resident 
Advisors in the undergraduate dorms to defray college expenses.
ACCREDITATION
The Occupational Therapy Program is accredited by the 
Accreditation Council for Occupational Therapy Education 
(ACOTE). Its graduates are therefore eligible to sit for the national 
certification examination for the occupational therapist administered 
by the National Board for Certification in Occupational Therapy. 
After successful completion of this exam, the individual will be 
an Occupational Therapist, Registered (OTR). Most states require 
licensure in order to practice; however, state licenses are usually 
based on the results of the certification examination. For further 
information on accreditation, the address and telephone number for 
ACOTE are 7501 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 510E, Bethesda, MD 
20814; (301) 652-6611 x2042.
CURRICULUM 
OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY POST BS/BA SEQUENCE
First Year Summer
GOCCT 501	 	
Foundations of OT	
3
GOCCT 503	 	
Occupational Analysis Lab	
1
GOCCT 561 	 	
Theoretical Foundations of OT	
3
Total 		
	
	
7
First Year Fall
GOCCT 505 	 	
Clinical Neuroscience	
4
GOCCT 517	 	
 OT Intervention Psychosocial I	
3
GOCCT 518 	 	
OT Intervention Psychosocial I Lab	
1
GOCCT 542 	 	
Analysis of Human Movement	
3
GOCCT 543 	 	
Analysis of Human Movement Lab	
1
GOCCT 586 	 	
OT Medical Sciences	
3 
GOCCT 527 	 	
Fieldwork Seminar	
1 
Total 		
	
	
16
First Year Spring
GOCCT 511	  	 Neurorehab Techniques	
3
GOCCT 512 	 	
Neurorehab Techniques Lab	
1
GOCCT 519 	 	
OT Intervention: Psychosocial II	
4
GOCCT 520 	 	
OT Intervention: Psychosocial II Lab	
1
GOCCT 551 	 	
The Research Process	
3
Total 		
	
	
12
Second Year Fall
GOCCT 531 	 	
OT Intervention: Phys Disabilities I	
3
GOCCT 532 	 	
OT Intervention: Phys Disabilities I Lab	
1
GOCCT 537 	 	
OT Intervention: Pediatrics and  
Dev Disabilities I	
4
GOCCT 538 	 	
OT Intervention: Pediatrics and  
Dev Disabilities I Lab	
1
GOCCT 530 	 	
Community Based Intervention	
3
GOCCT 650 	 	
Research Seminar	
3
Total 		
	
	
15
Second Year Spring
GOCCT 533 	 	
OT Intervention: Physical Disabilities II	
4
GOCCT 534 	 	
OT Intervention: Physical Disabilities II Lab	 1
GOCCT 539 	 	
OT Intervention: Pediatrics and  
Dev Disabilities II	
3
GOCCT 540 	 	
OT Intervention: Pediatrics and  
Dev Disabilities II Lab	
1
GOCCT 630 	 	
Intervention Techniques for Gerontology	
3
GOCCT 640 	 	
Clinical Reasoning Seminar I	
3
GOCCT 750 	 	
Thesis I	
1
Total 		
	
	
16
Third Year Summer/Fall
GOCCT 660	 	
Field Work Experience II (A)	
8
GOCCT 661	 	
Field Work Experience II (B)	
8
Total 		
	
	
16
Third Year Spring
GOCCT 620	 	
Leadership and Management in OT	
3
GOCCT 710 	 	
Emerging Models of Practice 	
3
GOCCT 727 	 	
Advanced Intervention: Theory and  
Techniques Lab	
1
GOCCT 730 	 	
Professional Issues Seminar 	
3
GOCCT 720 	 	
The Occupational Lens	
2
GOCCT 751 	 	
Thesis II 	
3
Total 		
	
	
15
Total credits: 97
136
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GOCCT 501 Foundations of Occupational Therapy
3 credits
Development of Occupational Therapy as a profession; concepts of 
occupational role acquisition and role dysfunction; use of human 
occupation as therapeutic intervention; exploration of domains of 
practice of OT; scopes of practice of health professionals; health 
and wellness; health care delivery systems; disability; professional 
behavior. Development of philosophy and theory in occupational 
therapy; examination of the conceptual models which have shaped 
occupational therapy since its inception, analysis of current 
theories, models and frames of reference which shape practice. In-
depth analysis of the concepts underlying occupational behavior, 
occupational science and clinical reasoning.
GOCCT 503 Occupational Analysis Lab
1 credit
This lab course will expand on the Occupational Therapy Practice 
Framework and the concepts contained within this document. This 
course provides students with hands-on experience in analysis 
of selected tasks of work, self-care and play/leisure with special 
emphasis on analysis of arts and crafts as well as the process of 
adapting and grading. 
GOCCT 505 Clinical Neuroscience
4 credits
Prerequisite: GOCCT 526 or Permission of Instructor	
An in-depth study of the structure and function of the central nervous 
system relative to human behavior. Peripheral structures involved 
in sensorimotor function will be included. Clinical conditions and 
case studies, including their influence on occupational performance 
components and areas, will be utilized. 
GOCCT 511 Neurorehabilitation Techniques
3 credits
Prerequisites: GOCCT 505
Corequisite: GOCCT 512
Analysis of various theoretical approaches to the treatment of 
central nervous system motor dysfunction throughout the life 
span. Topics will include neurodevelopmental, sensorimotor, and 
kinesiological approaches to motor dysfunction including relevant 
research findings. Current research regarding the efficacy of the 
various theoretical approaches will be explored.
GOCCT 512 Neurorehabilitation Techniques Lab
1 credit
Prerequisites: GOCCT 505
Corequisite: GOCCT 511
Laboratory will provide guided experiences in neurorehabilitation 
handling techniques, application to human occupations, clinical 
reasoning, case analyses and selected clinical experiences. Current 
research regarding the efficacy of the various theoretical approaches 
will be explored. Lab fee
GOCCT 517 Occupational Therapy Intervention:  
Psychosocial I
3 credits
Co-requisite: GOCCT518
This is an integrated theory and practice course examining 
occupational therapy models for psychosocial treatment 
approaches based on the current research body of knowledge. 
Development of interpersonal skills, group leadership skills, and 
the therapeutic use of self are introduced. Areas explored include 
techniques for prevention, understanding of the process of group 
dynamics, remediation of role dysfunction within various cultures, 
populations, and diagnosis groups. OT Intervention: Psychosocial 
I is the first of two courses dealing with psychosocial dysfunction. 
GOCCT 518 Occupational Therapy Intervention:  
Psychosocial I Lab
1 credit
Co-requisites: GOCCT 517
This lab course provides students with hands-on experience in 
examining occupational therapy models for psychosocial treatment 
approaches based on the current research body of knowledge. 
Development of interpersonal skills, group leadership skills, and 
the therapeutic use of self are fostered. Areas explored include 
techniques for prevention, understanding of the process of group 
dynamics, remediation of role dysfunction within various cultures, 
populations, and diagnosis groups. Lab fee
GOCCT 519 OT Intervention: Psychosocial II
3 credits
Prerequisites: GOCCT 517; GOCCT 518
Co-requisite: GOCCT 520
This course integrates OT theory and practice and the use of self 
in a therapeutic manner (the intentional relationship) in relation 
to occupational therapy evaluations, interventions, and clinical 
fieldwork experiences. The basis for this course is mental health 
throughout the lifespan and this represents the course framework. 
Mental health diagnosis, signs, symptoms, medications, and 
behaviors will be presented. Fieldwork placements for this course 
will provide a dynamic and total experience of academic learning 
placed into clinical action with clients who experience mental 
health issues either primarily or secondarily in the community. 
This course includes traditional lecture, student presentations, and 
community-based fieldwork placements throughout the semester.
GOCCT 520 OT Intervention: Psychosocial II Lab
1 credit
Prerequisites: GOCCT 517; GOCCT 518
Co-requisite: GOCCT 519
This lab course integrates OT theory and practice and the use of 
self in a therapeutic manner (the intentional relationship) in relation 
to occupational therapy evaluations, interventions, and clinical 
fieldwork experiences. Course labs provide hands-on activities 
to strengthen concepts learned in lecture and provide a format for 
peer learning of evaluations, screens, and interventions. Lab fee
137
Occupational Therapy
GOCCT 527 Fieldwork Seminar
1 credit
Prerequisites: OCCT 461/GOCCT 561
This seminar is designed to facilitate the student’s personal 
and professional growth in preparation for Level I and Level II 
fieldwork experiences. Throughout the course of this seminar, 
students will prepare to effectively incorporate the tenets of 
professional development to successfully transition to the clinical 
setting. Content will address the following: the fieldwork process, 
clinical learning styles, the fieldwork onboarding requirement 
process, the student/fieldwork educator relationship, professional 
appearance, professional communication and professional 
development, exploration of the various areas of occupational 
therapy practice, and fieldwork evaluations.
GOCCT 530 Community-Based Intervention
3 credits
Prerequisite: GOCCT 519; GOCCT 520; 
Corequisite: GOCCT 531; GOCCT 532; GOCCT 537; GOCCT 538 
Therapeutic intervention with concentration on community-based 
practice and populations; special emphasis on the needs of the 
elderly; health/wellness programs; community centers; homeless 
populations; and special considerations in home health.
GOCCT 531 OT Intervention: Physical Disabilities I
3 credits
Prerequisites: GOCCT 586; GOCCT 511; GOCCT 512; GOCCT 
519; GOCCT 520
Co-requisites: GOCCT 532
This course examines the Occupational Therapy evaluation and 
treatment planning process as it relates to individuals with physical 
disabilities. Students will acquire information regarding evaluation 
of all areas of the Occupational Therapy domain: occupation; client 
factors; performance skills; performance patterns; and contexts and 
environments. Students will also gain knowledge of intervention 
planning, documentation, and specific intervention practice 
settings, as they relate to individuals with physical disabilities.
GOCCT 532 OT Intervention: Physical Disabilities I Lab
1 credit
Prerequisites: GOCCT 586; GOCCT 511; GOCCT 512; GOCCT 
519; GOCCT 520
Co-requisites: GOCCT 531
This lab course builds upon the information acquired in OT 
Intervention: Physical Disabilities I Lecture. Students will gain 
hands-on experiences related to evaluations, intervention planning, 
documentation, and specific intervention practice settings, as they 
relate to individuals with physical disabilities. Lab fee
GOCCT 533 OT Intervention: Physical Disabilities II
4 credits
Prerequisites: GOCCT 531; GOCCT 532
Co-requisite: GOCCT 534
This course explores the analysis and adaptation of the human 
and non-human environments in response to role dysfunction, as 
well as architectural barriers, orthotics, prosthetics, wheelchair 
prescription and management, adaptive equipment and assistive 
technology. OT interventions for specific adult physical disabilities 
including orthopedic, neurological and general medical conditions 
are presented. Prevention and treatment interventions are explored 
as well as the psychosocial aspects of physical dysfunction and 
application of clinical reasoning through case studies and review of 
relevant research. Level I fieldwork in an adult Physical Disabilities 
setting included. 
GOCCT 534 OT Intervention: Physical Disabilities II Lab
1 credit
Prerequisites: GOCCT 531; GOCCT 532
Co-requisite: GOCCT 533
This lab course builds upon the information acquired in OT 
Intervention: Physical Disabilities II Lecture. Students design and 
implement OT interventions for specific adult physical disabilities 
including orthopedic, neurological and general medical conditions. 
Prevention and treatment interventions are explored as students gain 
hands-on experience in the analysis and adaptation of the human 
and non-human environments in response to role dysfunction, as 
well as architectural barriers, orthotics, prosthetics, wheelchair 
prescription and management, adaptive equipment and assistive 
technology. Lab fee
GOCCT 537 OT Intervention: Pediatrics  
and Developmental Disabilities I
4 credits
Prerequisites: GOCCT 586; GOCCT 511; GOCCT 512
Co-requisites: GOCCT 531; GOCCT 532; GOCCT 538
This course involves atypical development resulting in problems 
in role performance with interventions to address dysfunction in 
children. Role acquisition, competence, adaptation, and dysfunction 
from birth through adolescence in the areas of sensory, motor, 
perceptual, cognitive, and play will be addressed. Students will 
analyze appropriate use of specific assessments and treatment 
techniques from a range of theoretical frames of reference.
GOCCT 538 OT Intervention: Pediatrics and  
Developmental Disabilities I Lab
1 credit
Prerequisites: GOCCT 586; GOCCT 511; GOCCT 512
Co-requisites: GOCCT 531; GOCCT 532; GOCCT 537
This course builds on information acquired in OT Intervention: 
Pediatrics and Developmental Disabilities I Lecture. Through hands 
on learning students analyze and utilize appropriate and specific 
assessments and treatment techniques from a range of theoretical 
frames of reference with guided practice along with clinical 
reasoning through case studies and active lab learning activities. 
The use of assistive technology will also be incorporated. Lab fee
138
GOCCT 539 OT Intervention: Pediatrics  
and Developmental Disabilities II
3 credits
Prerequisites: GOCCT 537; GOCCT 538
Co-requisites: GOCCT 540; GOCCT 533; GOCCT 534
This course is a continuation in knowledge acquisition of pediatrics 
and developmental disabilities building off of GOCCT 537 and 
538. Students will learn how to provide pediatric O.T. intervention 
in a variety of settings and models, including educational, early 
intervention and medical rehab. Further learning surrounding child 
and adolescent development and specific treatment techniques 
from a range of theoretical frames of references will be included.
GOCCT 540 OT Intervention: Pediatrics  
and Developmental Disabilities II Lab
1 credit
Prerequisites: GOCCT 537; GOCCT 538
Co-requisites: GOCCT 539; GOCCT 533; GOCCT 534
This course provides students with the opportunity to apply and 
practice hands on application of the knowledge acquisition of 
pediatrics and developmental disabilities building off of GOCCT 
537 and 538 and GOCCT 539 lecture. Students will practice 
assessment strategies, various treatment intervention and discharge 
planning related to a variety of settings and models, including 
educational, early intervention and medical rehab. Active learning 
lab activities including pediatric hand splinting, sensory based 
interventions and assistive technology/wheelchair procurement 
will be addressed. Level I Fieldwork in a pediatric setting will be 
included. Lab fee
GOCCT 542 Analysis of Human Movement
3 credits
Prerequisites: PHYS 101, BIOL 108/109, BIOL 110/111,  
GOCCT 503 
Co-requisite: GOCCT 543
Analysis of movement from a musculoskeletal orientation with 
focus on motor, sensory and motor learning components of human 
movement and their impact on occupations such as work, self-care, 
and play/leisure. Clinical examples will be provided to connect 
lecture to real-life application. This course will also discuss the 
influence of neurological, biomechanical, and human/non-human 
environments on daily occupations.
GOCCT 543 Analysis of Human Movement Lab
1 credit 
Prerequisites: PHYS 101, BIOL 108/109, BIOL 110/111,  
GOCCT 503 
Co-requisite: GOCCT 542
This course builds upon knowledge acquired in Analysis of Human 
Movement lecture, providing students with hands-on experiences 
regarding analysis of movement from a musculoskeletal orientation 
with focus on motor, sensory and motor learning and the impact on 
occupations such as work, self-care, and play/leisure.
GOCCT 551 The Research Process
3 credits	
Using a comprehensive approach, this course is designed 
to stimulate student interest in the research process, theory 
development, and translations of findings to practice in health 
sciences. Students learn the components, principles and methods 
of scientific research to become discerning consumers of research. 
GOCCT 561 Theoretical Foundations of Occupational Therapy
3 credits
Development of philosophy and theory in occupational therapy; 
examination of the conceptual models which have shaped 
occupational therapy since its inception, analysis of current 
theories, models and frames of reference which shape practice. In-
depth analysis of the concepts underlying occupational behavior, 
occupational science and clinical reasoning.
	
	 	 	
GOCCT 586 Occupational Therapy Medical Sciences	
3 credits
Signs, symptoms, medical management and pharmacological 
management of general medical, neurological, orthopedic and 
psychiatric conditions relevant to occupational therapy intervention. 
	
	 	
GOCCT 590 Special Topics
1-3 credits
Prerequisite: Permission of Instructor 
A course designed to provide in-depth study of a specific topic; 
objectives are determined on a course by course basis relative to 
the expertise of the faculty, needs of the students or relevance to a 
changing professional environment.
GOCCT 599 Independent Study
1-3 credits, Fall, Spring, Summer
An independent study whose objectives are determined 
collaboratively between student and instructor; designed to enrich 
a student’s depth of study in a specific area.
	
	
GOCCT 620 Leadership and Management in OT
3 credits
Supervision and management theory and techniques with research 
review and application; role delineation; COTA and OTR collab-
orative intervention; quality assurance; program development; 
financial management; management methods in current healthcare 
systems and alternative work settings including funding resources; 
and developing independent small businesses in alternative settings. 
GOCCT 630 Intervention Techniques for Gerontology
3 credits
Prerequisites: GOCCT 519; GOCCT 520; GOCCT 531; GOCCT 532
This course will explore various evidence-based strategies for 
improving health and functional independence of older adults. 
Students will be introduced to the various age related changes 
that occur in the cardiovascular, pulmonary, musculoskeletal, 
neuromuscular, and information processing systems. Course 
139
Occupational Therapy
content will be delivered primarily through lecture, discussions, 
and article reviews. Case studies and interactive clinical activities 
will allow students the opportunity to design and implement an 
occupational therapy screening, evaluation, plan of care, and 
treatment for individuals with a variety of diagnoses commonly 
encountered in the aging populations.
GOCCT 640 Clinical Reasoning Seminar
3 credits
Prerequisite: GOCCT 519; GOCCT 520; GOCCT 531; GOCCT 
532; GOCCT 537; GOCCT 538
The Liberal Studies senior capstone is the culminating experience 
of the Core curriculum and therefore requires students to integrate 
knowledge and skills from their major study areas, Liberal Studies 
courses, and co-curricular experiences. The course emphasizes 
cultural competence, leadership, ethical reasoning, Catholic social 
teaching, and LIFECORE. Additionally, the OT capstone covers 
the analysis of therapeutic intervention as an interpretive process. 
Application of procedural, interactive, conditional and narrative 
reasoning to therapeutic intervention through selected case analysis 
across disabilities and the life span. 
GOCCT 650 Research Seminar
3 credits
Prerequisite: GOCCT 550 or GOCCT 552
This course involves the systematic writing of the research proposal 
and application of the research process and methodologies as they 
apply to the field of occupational therapy. Focus is on the methods 
of research design, with critical analysis of its components including 
collection, analysis, and interpretation of data. Synthesizing the 
relationships of the problem, methodology, hypothesis, and data 
analysis will be pivotal in the course. This course will culminate 
in the production of an approved proposal, which will be the basis 
of the student’s completed thesis.
GOCCT 660/661 Fieldwork Experience II (A) and II (B)
8/8 credits
Prerequisite: Satisfactory completion of all prior course 
requirements, permission of faculty
This course involves six months full-time clinical experience in 
two different occupational therapy settings and supervised practice 
of therapeutic assessment and intervention techniques. Students 
will gain experience in a wide variety of clinical conditions and 
age ranges. 
GOCCT 710 Emerging Models of Practice
3 credits
This course will examine emerging models of practice in the field. 
These will vary, based upon current Occupational Therapy theory, 
practice and service delivery models. In-depth exploration and 
understanding of current healthcare policies; social, demographic, 
and political issues driving the healthcare system; influences in 
delivery of services in OT. Informatics will be utilized as primary 
sources. Participants will examine new methods and settings in 
which to provide OT intervention and apply these in a local agency 
or organization. Participants will also evaluate the effectiveness of 
these services and modify them as needed.
GOCCT 720 The Occupational Lens
2 credits
Prerequisite: GOCCT 660; GOCCT 661
The course explores occupational science and humans as 
occupational beings, and promotes discussion related to 
occupational deprivation and its relationship to occupational 
participation, justice, advocacy and the benefits of engagement 
in occupation. Students analyze occupation as a life organizer 
and develop and utilize observational skills, and problem solving 
approaches to view therapy from an occupational lens. 
GOCCT 727 Advanced Intervention:  
Theory and Techniques Lab
1 credit
Prerequisites: GOCCT 660; GOCCT 661
This lab course introduces students to advanced theories and 
techniques used in occupational therapy practice. Emphasis is 
on hands-on application of advanced therapeutic intervention 
techniques and theories across age ranges, analysis, and adaptation 
of the human and non-human environments in response to role 
dysfunction; advanced modalities, refined handling techniques, 
advanced hand treatment, assistive technology application, and 
complementary and alternative therapies.
GOCCT 730 Professional Issues Seminar
3 credits
Prerequisite: GOCCT 660; GOCCT 661
Co-requisite: GOCCT 727
Critical analysis of current professional issues will be examined in 
this course. Topics will include, but not be limited to: healthcare 
delivery systems, professional boundaries, regulatory agencies, 
specialization, validation of theory; analysis of current social, 
political, cultural and economic change; continuing professional 
development; contributions to the profession and society.
GOCCT 750/751 Thesis I and II
1/3 credits
Prerequisite: GOCCT 650, approval of the thesis director
This sequence builds on GOCCT 650 by further developing and 
complementing the group research proposal. Discussion leading to 
systematic investigation of a research problem including gathering 
and analyzing the data, synthesizing and discussing the information 
collected, and summarizing the conclusions.
140
Post Professional 
Occupational 
Therapy 
Doctorate 
(PPOTD) Degree
Program Director: Blair Carsone, Ph.D., OTR
INTRODUCTION
The post-professional OTD curriculum is designed to prepare 
practicing occupational therapists to become advanced practitioners 
capable of serving as evidence-based leaders. The capstone 
component is an integral part of the program. It is designed to 
develop occupational therapists with advanced knowledge/skills in 
one of the following eight areas: clinical practice, research skills, 
administration, leadership, program and policy development, 
advocacy, education, or theory development.
With a keen understanding of the responsibilities of the practicing 
occupational therapist, this mission is accomplished by entering 
a two-year, part-time online program. It combines web-based 
instruction with a virtual presentation of the final capstone project 
to internal and external audiences. Our program is unique in that 
post-professional OTD students develop a strong cohort model that 
is helpful to their academic, professional, and personal growth.
MISSION
The mission of the post-professional Occupational Therapy 
Doctorate (ppOTD) program is to enable occupational therapists in 
any practice area or other position in health, education, community 
practice or other arenas to develop roles and skills beyond that of 
the therapist-clinician; to educate them to become practitioner-
scholars who can translate knowledge (including cross-disciplinary 
theories and research) into practice and who are capable of serving 
as agents of change in new and expanded arenas. 
APPLICATION PROCESS
The Office of Graduate Admissions and the Occupational Therapy 
Doctorate Department receives and reviews applications for the 
post-professional OTD program on a monthly basis. The electronic 
application can be located at www.apply.gannon.edu. After 
completion of the application, candidates are required to submit 
supplemental materials to the Office of Graduate Admissions. This 
includes, but is not limited to, the following information: academic 
transcripts, OT licensure, AOTA national and state membership, 
curriculum vitae/resume, and references.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Acceptance requirements into the Post-Professional Occupational 
Therapy Doctorate program will be based on the following: 
•	 Completed master’s degree
•	 Master’s degree in Occupational Therapy (Bachelor’s degree 
with extensive OT practice background will be considered) 
•	 Minimum graduate GPA of 3.0 on a 4.0 scale
•	 OT license (in state of practice)
•	 AOTA and state OT organization membership
Application Procedures for the Post-Professional Occupational 
Therapy Doctorate Program: 
•	 Submit online graduate application (apply.gannon.edu) and 
materials: 
•	 Official transcript from all prior institutions
•	 One letter of recommendation
•	 Copy of OT license
•	 Curriculum vitae or professional resume
•	 Personal statement of professional and educational goals
STUDENT SUCCESS ONLINE
Gannon’s Online Engagement Coordinator facilitates our online 
new student orientations, implements strategies to ensure that online 
students are active in their online courses, and provides general 
online student support through a variety of high-touch methods to 
engage students and support student retention efforts.
Gannon online students can reach out to our Office of Distance 
Education with general questions about online learning or how to 
remotely access Gannon’s comprehensive student services.
CURRICULUM
The post-professional Occupational Therapy Doctorate is a doctoral 
degree which is awarded upon the successful completion of the 
following 34 credits:
Summer 1 – Total credits 	
6
PPOTD 900 	 	
Applied Research in Clinical Practice	
3
PPOTD 902 	 	
Advanced Occupations	
3
Fall 1 – Total credits	
5
PPOTD 911 	 	
OT in Community and Wellness	
2
PPOTD 915 	 	
Capstone Development	
3
Spring 1 – Total credits	
6
PPOTD 920	
	
Expanded Models of Practice in OT	
3
PPOTD 925	
	
Capstone Project Proposal	
3
Summer 2 – Total credits	
5
PPOTD 930	
	
Advanced Leadership and Ethics	
2
PPOTD 935	
	
Reasoning and Evidenced-Based Practice	
3
141
PPOTD Degree
Fall 2 – Total credits	
6
PPOTD 940	
	
Analysis of Policy and Change in OT	
3
PPOTD 945	
	
Teaching in Practice and Community	
3
Spring 2 – Total credits	
6
PPOTD 950	
	
Entrepreneurship for the OT Professional	
3
PPOTD 960	
	
Capstone Project	
3
Total credits: 34
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS 
PPOTD 900 Applied Research in Clinical Practice
3 Credits
Prerequisites: None
This course provides an overview of research design from the 
perspective of the hierarchy of levels of evidence. Students will 
examine common designs of studies from lowest to highest levels 
of evidence in terms of purpose of study, question formulation, 
methodological features and significance of findings for application 
in practice. Using critical analysis skills, students will critique 
recent literature related to a topic of interest. Students will learn 
about the capstone project process and begin to develop an area 
of inquiry.
PPOTD 902 Advanced Occupations
3 Credits
Prerequisites: None
This is a course in the study of occupational performance 
analysis. Through various learning activities, students develop 
and communicate mechanisms to infuse a lifelong learning model 
to professional practice. This course will also examine the role of 
occupation in enhancing the health of populations through health 
promotion, health education and prevention of illness.
PPOTD 911 OT in Community Health and Wellness
2 Credits
Prerequisites: None
Students will explore applications of occupational therapy practice 
and practitioner skills in various community settings, roles, and 
programs. The course includes examination of health and wellness 
interventions within community-based practice and with varying 
populations. Using documents from the World Health Organization, 
Healthy People, various community-oriented models and theories, 
and the Occupational Therapy Practice Framework, students 
will engage in program planning and development as well as 
the evaluation process. Community partner identification, needs 
assessment, and sustainable program development will prepare 
students for various roles in community practice. The student 
will work to design a community-based program with a specific 
population in mind.
PPOTD 915 Capstone Project Development
3 Credits
This course introduces the student to the Capstone Project and 
process. Through engagement with faculty, Capstone Advisor, and 
mentors, the student will begin the initial steps of their capstone 
project. Exploration of evidence-based literature and other materials 
will assist the student in identifying a topic area for further 
examination. Using their critical appraisal skills, students will 
select and analyze literature that supports their capstone project 
idea. Students will also begin to document their doctoral journey in 
journal format. In preparation for completion of the OTD, students 
will begin to develop a professional portfolio that illustrates their 
professional accomplishments. 
PPOTD 920 Expanded Models of Practice for OT
3 Credits
Students will examine current theories, frameworks, and practice 
and service delivery models that support growing areas of practice 
as well as new and emerging models of practice in the field of 
OT. Students will analyze the current topics related to changes to 
systems. The course will provide an in-depth analysis of current 
healthcare policies, regulation, social, political and demographic 
issues driving the healthcare system and their impact on how OT 
services are delivered. Technology and technologic advances and 
their role on emerging practice areas and expanded OT services 
will be discussed. Students will examine new methods and settings 
in which they may provide OT interventions. Students will learn 
about methods of program and service evaluation to justify and 
enhance the effectiveness of these services. 
PPOTD 925 Capstone Project Proposal
3 Credits
Prerequisites: PPOTD 915
This course builds on the Capstone Development course as students 
begin their Capstone Project proposal through development of a 
literature base that supports the project, selection of a theory, model 
or conceptual framework, and development of the procedures 
necessary for carrying out their project. Students will explore 
various research designs, steps for data analysis, and be prepared 
to explain the purpose, rationale, and usefulness of their intended 
project to audiences both internal and external to the profession of 
OT. Students will continue to document their ppOTD and capstone 
journey as well as add to their professional portfolio. 
PPOTD 930 Advanced Leadership and Ethics
2 Credits
Prerequisites: None
This course will examine leadership roles, practices and ethical 
responsibilities as they relate to diverse organizational settings. 
Evolving leadership theories and styles will be explored as well as 
ethical dilemmas. Students will identify strategies for improving 
personal and professional responsive leadership efforts after 
analyzing their own leadership strengths. Self-reflection, self-
discovery, integrity, credibility as well as other leadership concepts 
and themes will influence this course.
142
PPOTD 935 Reasoning and Evidence-Based Practice
3 Credits
Prerequisites: PPOTD 925
This course is designed to further develop essential skills for 
conducting evidence-based practice. Students will explore readings 
from a variety of peer-reviewed journals in order to expand their 
awareness of literature that may provide valuable evidence for 
occupational therapy practice. The course will focus on appraising 
the internal, external, and statistical validity of evidence in relation 
to client outcomes. Further, students will analyze practice changes 
based on data related to clinical outcomes. The course proceeds 
to examine data analysis methods for a variety of quantitative, 
qualitative, and mixed methods in preparation for the final steps 
of the Capstone Project and future clinical research. 
PPOTD 940 Analysis of Policy and Change in OT
3 Credits
Prerequisite: None
This course provides students with an introduction to health care 
change and examination of policies related to occupational therapy 
in the United States. Students will review the history of disability 
policy, and examine social, medical and political models and their 
influence on the delivery of health care and occupational therapy 
practice. An understanding of political process related to health 
care and major players in policy development will be explored 
along with the use of advocacy on micro and macro levels. Critical 
analysis of the use and impact of clinical outcome measures 
in occupational therapy and their effect on policy making will 
be covered. 
PPOTD 945 Teaching in Practice and Community
3 Credits
Prerequisites: None
This course will examine the foundations of adult learning as well 
as their application in educating the public and addressing health 
literacy. This course identifies the advanced practitioner’s role in 
various practice settings and the impact of ethical, political, legal, 
socio-cultural, and economic factors affecting programmatic goals. 
This course will explore personal teaching and learning styles and 
Boyer’s Scholarship of Teaching. 
PPOTD 950 Entrepreneurship for the OT Professional
3 Credits
Prerequisites: None
This course provides the OT practitioner with advanced knowledge 
in occupational therapy service delivery. From a management 
standpoint, students will analyze and assess various topics that 
will enable them to expand an area of current practice or to 
plan, develop, assess, fund, and market a new program/service/
business. Regulations, policies, legal and ethical issues, funding, 
and other key aspects of successful program planning, delivery, 
and sustainability will be explored. 
PPOTD 960 Capstone Project
3 Credits
Prerequisites: PPOTD 915 and 925
During this course students complete a final project that 
demonstrates the synthesis of occupational therapy theory, 
evidence-based practice principles and advanced knowledge in 
a practice area. Students demonstrate skills of self-direction, 
self-sufficiency, independence and professionalism expected of 
therapists prepared at the doctoral level. The final component of 
the course requires the student to complete a professional written 
report and oral presentation.
143
Physical Therapy
Physical Therapy
The Doctor of Physical 
Therapy (DPT) Degree
Chairperson: Carolyn Galleher, PT, DHSc
INTRODUCTION
Physical Therapy is a health care profession that primarily focuses 
on the preservation, development, and restoration of optimal 
function. Physical therapists provide evaluative, rehabilitative, and 
preventive health care services designed to alleviate pain; prevent 
the onset and progression of impairment, functional limitation, and 
participation restrictions resulting from injury, disease, or other 
causes; and restore, maintain and promote overall fitness, health and 
optimal quality of life. Physical therapists work with individuals of 
all ages who demonstrate movement dysfunction, or the potential 
for such dysfunction, of the neurological, musculoskeletal, 
integumentary, and cardiopulmonary systems.
Physical therapists practice in a hospital setting or provide services 
in out-of-hospital settings through home health agencies, in skilled 
nursing facilities, in industrial settings, through public health 
agencies, in private physical therapy clinics, in public schools and 
in a variety of other nontraditional settings.
VISION
Gannon University’s Doctor of Physical Therapy Program in Erie, 
PA will be a leader in educating autonomous physical therapists 
who participate in integrative and collaborative practice to 
facilitate high quality health and educational outcomes. We will 
be practitioners of choice in the community, recognized as experts 
in movement, function and health. As leaders we will embrace our 
social responsibility, promote humanistic care, and contribute to 
the profession’s body of knowledge.
MISSION
The mission of the Doctor of Physical Therapy Program at 
Gannon University in Erie, PA facilitates holistic patient/client-
centered management related to movement, function and health. 
We prepare our graduates to be knowledgeable, service-oriented, 
reflective practitioners. Our graduates render evidence based, 
professional judgments concerning patient/client needs by virtue of 
critical thinking, interprofessional collaboration, lifelong learning, 
and ethical principles. They possess the intellect, psychomotor 
proficiency, leadership capabilities, and core values to meet the 
current and future needs of the profession, the health care system 
and society.
PHILOSOPHY
•	 Physical therapists are integral members of the health care 
team who are recognized and respected for their education, 
experience, and expertise in movement, function and health. 
The Doctor of Physical Therapy Program at Gannon University 
in Erie, PA is guided by the following tenets: The essence of 
physical therapy practice is patient/client-centered management 
for body functions, activity and participation related to 
movement, function and health.
•	 Professional physical therapist education should prepare 
individuals to be autonomous practitioners capable of providing 
direct access.
•	 Active, integrative and experiential learning methods promote 
student self-reliance, increase self-assessment skills and develop 
a pattern of independent learning that will promote lifelong 
learning and continuing professional development.
•	 Evidence-based practice (EBP) is the framework for physical 
therapy practitioners’ clinical decision making. EBP skills 
are cultivated through development of self-directed learning, 
utilizing a variety of resources that are enhanced by technology.
•	 The health care environment is continually evolving. Physical 
therapist practice encompasses roles in primary, secondary, 
and tertiary care, as well as prevention, health promotion and 
wellness.
•	 Practitioners are educators who use their knowledge, creativity, 
communication and interpersonal skills to promote the health 
of individuals and communities.
•	 Global citizenship is expressed within the practitioner’s life 
by advocating for equitable allocation of healthcare resources, 
providing of culturally sensitive care; maximizing multicultural 
learning; cultivating awareness and perspective of the global 
society; and understanding the existence of, the cause of, and 
our role in addressing health disparity.
•	 Competency based education ensures that practitioners 
demonstrate proficiency in knowledge, psychomotor, and 
affective domains.
•	 Professionalism is an integral part of physical therapy education 
and practice.
GOALS 
Consistent with the University’s and Program’s Mission Statement, 
the goals of the Doctor of Physical Therapy Program at Gannon 
University Erie Campus are below: 
•	 The DPT Program and DPT faculty will deliver evolving 
contemporary, evidence-based professional Doctor of Physical 
Therapist education.
•	 The DPT Program will graduate knowledgeable, service-
oriented, collaborative practitioners.
•	 The DPT Program and DPT faculty will support the growth 
of physical therapy by developing graduates who engage in 
ongoing professional development.
•	 The DPT Program, DPT faculty, and students/graduate 
will promote the health, wellness, and quality of life in the 
community and society.
144
•	 The DPT faculty will contribute to the advancement of 
knowledge in physical therapy and health science through 
scholarly inquiry.
•	 The DPT faculty and students/graduates will model 
professionalism through involvement in the University, the 
profession and associated organizations.
OUTCOMES
Our students at graduation will be competent in patient/client 
centered care management for body functions, activity and 
participation related to movement, function and health.
Our students at graduation will demonstrate professionalism and 
ethical behavior in all aspects of the educational, community and 
clinical setting.
Our students at graduation will incorporate evidence-based practice 
in clinical decision making.
Our students at graduation will be skilled in educating, collaborating, 
and communicating with patients/clients, caregivers, colleagues, 
payers and policy makers.
ADMISSION 
Prerequisite Course Requirements for entry into the Doctor of 
Physical Therapy Program include the following:
Biology 	
(200 or 300 level Human Anatomy  
and Physiology courses do not meet  
this prerequisite) 	
2 semesters
Chemistry	
	
	
2 semesters 
Psychology	
(200 level behavioral/ 
social science course)	
1 semester
Statistics	
	
	
1 semester
Human Anatomy with Lab	
	
	 	 	
(Human Gross Anatomy  
recommended; course should be  
at 200 or 300 level at four-year  
degree granting institution) 	
1 semester
Human Physiology with Lab	
1 semester
Exercise Physiology (lab recommended)	
1 semester
Physics with Lab		
2 semesters
Important Note Regarding Prerequisites:
Prerequisites must be completed within five years preceding 
entrance to the graduate program.
Recommended Courses:
Social Sciences – at least two additional semesters in social sciences 
(i.e., Sociology, Social Psychology) Kinesiology with lab
Communication:
Practice as a health care professional requires the ability to 
communicate both in written and oral form. The physical therapy 
program stresses communication and expects enrolled students to 
demonstrate graduate level competence in written as well as oral 
communication.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
•	 Baccalaureate degree from an accredited college or university
•	 cumulative prerequisite course quality point average (QPA) of 
3.0 or better (4.0 scale). Grades below a C are not acceptable
•	 overall undergraduate QPA of 3.0 or better (4.0 scale)
•	 applicant demonstrates the ethical, personal and professional 
qualities to fulfill the role of the physical therapist as determined 
by review of the applicant’s references
•	 application review begins on October 1; application deadline 
December 1
•	 qualified applicants will be called for an informational session
•	 TOEFL – Minimum score of 79 on internet exam for all 
applicants from non-English speaking countries
•	 meet essential functions: physical, emotional, intellectual, and 
communication standards
ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS OF THE 
STUDENT PHYSICAL THERAPIST
Essential functions are the activities that a student physical therapist 
must be able to perform in partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for successful completion of the professional curriculum. Every 
student must be able to perform these essential functions, with 
or without reasonable accommodations, while practicing safely, 
ethically, and in a legal manner. Reasonable accommodations are 
based on individual need, program essential requirements, public 
safety, and no undue hardship on the University or clinical sites.
If a student is unable to perform these essential functions, it is the 
student’s responsibility to:
1. 	Reveal a need for reasonable accommodations prior to entering 
the professional curriculum.
2. 	Obtain diagnostic data to substantiate a claim of need for 
reasonable accommodations.
3. 	Provide the diagnostic data to the institution prior to entering 
the professional curriculum.
The ability to perform essential functions is expected of students in 
the classroom, labs, simulated clinical settings, and while on clinical 
education assignments. The Doctor of Physical Therapy Program’s 
at the Erie PA campus essential functions are described below by: 
1) category and 2) examples. The examples are for clarity and do 
not represent an exhaustive list of all possible activities.
CATEGORY and EXAMPLE
Behavior – ability to act in a professional manner
•	 Practice safely, ethically, legally
145
Physical Therapy
•	 Demonstrate responsibility for lifelong professional growth and 
development
Critical thinking – ability to make clinical judgments
•	 Identify cause/effect relationships
•	 Develop patient outcomes/goals/interventions
•	 Respond to emergencies
•	 Apply standard precautions
•	 Apply teaching and learning theories in clinical practice
•	 Participate in scientific inquiry
Communication – ability to verbalize and write
•	 Explain treatment interventions
•	 Initiate health teaching
•	 Document and interpret physical therapist actions and patient 
responses
Coping – ability to perform in stressful environments  
or under deadlines	
•	 Maintain professional demeanor in all situations
•	 Accept constructive feedback
•	 Prioritize multiple commitments
•	 Recognize problems and apply stress management techniques
Hearing – auditory ability sufficient to monitor  
and assess health needs	
•	 Monitor alarms and emergency signals
•	 Respond to a timer
Interpersonal – ability to interact with groups  
from a variety of backgrounds	
•	 Establish rapport with patients, clients, and colleagues
•	 Recognize psychosocial impact of dysfunction/disability
•	 Demonstrate respect for the needs of the patient and family
•	 Demonstrate respect for diversity
Motor Skill – gross and fine motor abilities sufficient  
to provide safe and effective physical therapy
•	 Calibrate and operate equipment
•	 Maneuver in patients’ rooms and treatment spaces
•	 Guard patients and perform facilitation techniques during gait 
training
•	 Perform physical therapy assessment and treatment activities 
such as ROM, MMT, debridement, or use of physical agents
Tactile – ability to use touch to monitor and assess health needs
•	 Palpate
•	 Apply resistance during examinations or interventions
Visual – visual ability sufficient to monitor and assess health needs
•	 Observe patients’ responses
•	 Monitor vital signs
•	 Read medical records
•	 Observe integumentary integrity
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE
The tuition for students in the DPT program at the Erie, PA campus 
remains at the initial rate of when the student enrolled in the DPT 
program; thus tuition is not impacted by increases experienced 
during the three years of enrollment. A graduate financial award 
is provided to each admitted student (renewable for three years). 
Graduate assistantships are available to applicants to the program. 
Additional information about these assistantships is available from 
the DPT program or the program website.
CURRICULUM
Gannon University Erie campus offers an entry level DPT degree 
after the completion of 33 months of study (including summers). 
Building on the study of normal structure and function, the 
curriculum plan uses a theoretical base to build courses and learning 
experiences which prepare the student for the contemporary practice 
of physical therapy. Beginning with basic sciences, followed by 
clinical and physical therapy sciences, systems-based sequencing 
of the movement systems of musculoskeletal, neuromuscular, 
cardiovascular, pulmonary and integumentary are presented. 
Elements of the patient/client management model including 
examination, evaluation, physical therapy differential diagnosis, 
prognosis, intervention, and outcomes are integrated into each of the 
clinical science courses. Both clinical science and research content 
are framed within an evidence-based practice format, utilizing 
current scientific research in conjunction with clinical experience 
for a specific patient/client problem within the physical therapists’ 
scope of practice. Concepts between and within each course are 
cumulative, competency based, and continued enrollment depends 
upon mastery and use of previous concepts. Practical clinical 
experiences are integrated into the academic program to allow 
immediate application of didactic materials. The co-Directors 
of Clinical Education assign students to clinical sites, based on 
student needs and learning goals. In addition to sites in the Erie and 
western Pennsylvania areas, the program offers over 300 clinical 
experiences at sites throughout the country. This enables the student 
to have the opportunity to practice with a culturally diverse client 
population and learn various physical therapy approaches from 
experienced clinicians.
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
The DPT degree program at the Erie, PA campus requires one 
hundred eight (108) credit hours beyond the baccalaureate degree 
and must be completed as a full-time program. The curriculum 
below is the major didactic courses, although lab material is a large 
component of the content as indicated in the course descriptions.
1st Semester – Fall	
Credits
GDPT 811 	
	
Applied Anatomy	
2
GDPT 818 	
	
Foundations in Human Movement	
6
GDPT 815 	
	
Essentials of Physical Therapy Practice 	
2
GDPT 816 	
	
Community Health Initiative 1	
1
146
GDPT 802 	
	
Foundations in Pathology and	
3
	
	 	 	
	
Medical Managements for the PT 1
GDPT 810	
	
Health Care Systems and Policy 1	
2
Total		
	
	
16
2nd Semester – Spring
GDPT 814	
	
Evidence Based Practice 1	
2
GDPT 822	
	
Examination, Evaluation and Intervention
	
	 	 	
	
for Musculoskeletal Movement 
	
	 	 	
	
Dysfunction of the Extremities	
9
GDPT 825	
	
Examination, Evaluation and Intervention
	
	 	 	
	
for Musculoskeletal Movement 
	
	 	 	
	
Dysfunction of the Spine	
4
GDPT 826 	
	
Community Health Initiative 2	
1
GDPT 812 	
	
Foundations in Pathology and	
2
	
	 	 	
	
Medical Management for the PT 2
Total		
	
	
18
3rd Semester – Summer
GDPT 830 	
	
Health Care Systems and Policy 2	
2
GDPT 831 	
	
Foundations in Geriatrics	
2
GDPT 832 	
	
Clinical Experience 1 (10 weeks)	
5
Total		
 	 	
9
4th Semester – Fall
GDPT 821	
	
Examination, Evaluation and Intervention
	
	 	 	
	
for Cardiovascular and Pulmonary
	
	 	 	
	
Dysfunction 1	
2
GDPT 841 	
	
Foundations in Pediatrics	
4
GDPT 843 	
	
Examination, Evaluation, and  
Intervention for Neuromuscular  
Movement Dysfunction 1	
4
GDPT 848 	
	
Neuroscience	
5
GDPT 847 	
	
Clinical Synthesis 1	
1
GDPT 844 	
	
Evidence-Based Practice 2	
1
Total		
	
	
 17
5th Semester – Spring
GDPT 823	
	
Examination, Evaluation and  
Intervention for Cardiovascular  
and Pulmonary Dysfunction 2	
3
GDPT 850 	
	
Health Care Systems and Policy 3	
2
GDPT 853 	
	
Examination, Evaluation, and  
Intervention for Neuromuscular  
Movement Dysfunction 2	
9
GDPT 854 	
	
Evidence-Based Practice 3 and Guidance	
2 
GDPT 856 	
	
Community Health Initiative 3	
1
Total		
	
	
17
6th Semester – Summer
GDPT 862 	
	
Clinical Experience 2 (10 weeks)	
5
GDPT 867 	
	
Clinical Synthesis 2	
1
GDPT 860 	
	
Health Care Systems and Policy 4	
1
GDPT 866 	
	
Community Health Initiative 4	
1
Total		
 	 	
8
7th Semester – Fall
GDPT 873 	
	
Examination, Evaluation, and  
Intervention for Integumentary and 
Multi-System Movement Dysfunction	
4
GDPT 870 	
	
Health Care Systems and Policy 5	
2
GDPT 872 	
	
Clinical Experience 3 (8 weeks)	
4
Elective	
	
	
2-3
Total		
	
	
12-13
8th Semester – Spring
GDPT 882 	
	
Clinical Experience 4 (12 weeks)	
6
GDPT 887 	
	
Clinical Synthesis 3	
 2
GDPT 886 	
	
Community Health Initiative 5	
 1
Elective	
	
	
2-3
Total		
	
	
11-12
Total credits: 109-110
ELECTIVES
Five to six credits of elective coursework are required in this 
curriculum plan. Students may fulfill this requirement either by 
completing their group evidence-based project, selecting a program 
sponsored elective course or an independent study course available 
during the student’s 7th or 8th semesters of the program. 
3 + 3 DPT PROGRAM
For those students enrolled in the accelerated 3 + 3 DPT program 
they must successfully complete the first-year graduate courses 
for completion of the intended undergraduate degree. Failure 
to successfully complete the graduate coursework may result in 
additional undergraduate coursework to fulfill the undergraduate 
degree requirements.
LICENSURE
To achieve licensure as a physical therapist, program graduates 
must successfully complete and pass a comprehensive licensure 
examination administered by the Federation of State Boards of 
Physical Therapy (www.fsbpt.org). To assist graduating students in 
preparing for the licensure examination, the program offers a series 
of practice licensure examinations prior to graduation.
To practice as a physical therapist in the United States, many 
states require a clean criminal record, with no misdemeanors or 
felonies. Individuals with criminal records should contact the 
physical therapy licensing board of the state where they would 
like to practice prior to applying for admission to a DPT program 
so that they may fully inform themselves of any restrictions that 
may apply to them.
147
Physical Therapy
ACCREDITATION
The Physical Therapy educational program at the Erie, PA campus 
is accredited by the Commission on Accreditation in Physical 
Therapy Education of the American Physical Therapy Association.
For further information on accreditation, contact: CAPTE, 3030 
Potomac Ave., Suite 100, Alexandria, VA 22305-3085. Phone: 
(703) 706-3245.
CLINICAL EXPERIENCES
Students participate in four full-time clinical experiences [forty 
(40) total weeks] spaced throughout the curriculum. The clinical 
education component is designed to allow students the opportunity 
to practice and refine their assessment process, skills and techniques 
immediately following the presentation of the didactic material.
Many of the clinical sites that the DPT Program uses for clinical 
placements require a clear criminal record or the student may 
not be assigned to that site. Once admitted to a DPT program, a 
DPT student with a criminal record may be limited in clinical site 
assignments. Many clinical sites also require drug testing prior to 
starting the clinical experience. A clear drug test may be required 
for the student to participate in the learning experience.
The co-Directors of Clinical Education formally track the clinical 
site placements of each student, makes site selections, and advises 
each student to gain the most diverse exposure possible. Students 
are encouraged to complete clinical experiences outside of 
northwestern Pennsylvania.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GDPT 802 Foundations in Pathology and  
Medical Management for the PT 1
3 credits
This is the first in a two-semester course sequence which will take 
a systematic approach to examine the structural and physiologic 
changes with various diseases and conditions, current medical and 
pharmaceutical management, and the role of the physical therapist. 
Basic pathologic principles will be discussed for all diseases and 
conditions covered within each system, with a focus placed on 
clinical presentation, etiology, risk factors, genetic predispositions, 
physiology and pathophysiology. Basic pharmacologic principles 
and general drug classifications within each system will also 
be reviewed. Drug therapy rationale and implications will be 
discussed, with an emphasis on adverse effects and impact on 
physical therapy intervention. Basic review of and rationale for 
laboratory values, medical imaging and diagnostic testing will be 
discussed as part of the management of these diseases and the role 
of the physical therapist. Clinical decision-making skills will be 
applied using selected patient case studies.
Systems and/or topics which will be covered in this course 
sequence include: genomics, immunologic, infectious disease, 
integumentary, oncology, hepatic, pancreatic, biliary, hematologic, 
lymphatic, renal, urologic, reproductive, and biopsychosocial 
diseases/disorders.
GDPT 810 Health Care Systems and Policy 1
2 credits
Physical therapists work within the healthcare system, and have 
responsibilities and reimbursement impacted by health policy. This 
course will facilitate first year physical therapy students’ awareness 
of their role as a physical therapist related to reimbursement, ethics, 
advocacy, and team-based patient care. Using a blended classroom 
and online module approach to the course, the student will develop 
an understanding of the configuration of the US health care system 
and the delivery of physical therapy services, including the types 
of financing for these services. 
GDPT 811 Applied Anatomy
2 credits
An advanced study of human anatomy with cadaver dissection and 
clinical correlation to the practice of physical therapy. The course 
is structured to provide laboratory experiences that supplement 
the didactic material presented in GDPT 815 and GDPT 818. 
Incorporated in the course are activities to develop skills of 
teamwork and education of peers and review of professional 
literature as it relates to anatomy.
GDPT 812 Foundations in Pathology and  
Medical Management for the PT 2
2 credits
This is the second in a two-semester course sequence which 
will take a systematic approach to examine the structural and 
physiologic changes with various diseases and conditions, current 
medical and pharmaceutical management, and the role of the 
physical therapist. Basic pathologic principles will be discussed 
for all diseases and conditions covered within each system, with 
a focus placed on clinical presentation, etiology, risk factors, 
genetic predispositions, physiology and pathophysiology. Basic 
pharmacologic principles and general drug classifications within 
each system will also be reviewed. Drug therapy rationale and 
implications will be discussed, with an emphasis on adverse effects 
and impact on physical therapy intervention. Basic review of and 
rationale for laboratory values, medical imaging and diagnostic 
testing will be discussed as part of the management of these diseases 
and the role of the physical therapist. Clinical decision-making 
skills will be applied using selected patient case studies.
Systems and/or topics which will be covered in this course sequence 
include: endocrine/metabolic, musculoskeletal, autonomic 
nervous system, peripheral vascular, cardiovascular, respiratory, 
gastrointestinal, neurologic and multi-system diseases.
148
GDPT 814 Evidence-Based Practice 1
2 credits
This course teaches students how to ask a focused clinical question; 
search for the best available evidence to answer the question; 
understand how to critically appraise the evidence; and understand 
how the application of evidence supports clinical decision-making. 
Students will develop their knowledge of research terms, concepts, 
designs and the most frequently used statistical analyses in physical 
therapy literature. Students will learn how to critically appraise 
evidence related to diagnostic testing, clinical measures, prognosis, 
treatment efficacy and effectiveness, and systematic reviews with 
and without meta-analysis.
GDPT 815 Essentials of Physical Therapy Practice
2 credits
The essential concepts of the physical therapy patient/client 
management model are introduced, set within the context of the 
Guide to Physical Therapist Practice, and ICF model of disability 
and functioning. The five elements of patient/client management 
are defined with an emphasis on data that may be generated from a 
patient/client history. The profession and history of physical therapy 
are introduced. Medical terminology is reviewed. Applications 
of fundamental physical therapy interventions are initiated 
including standard precautions, patient/client positioning, transfers, 
assistive ambulation, wheelchair management, and negotiation of 
architectural barriers. Students begin learning patient data collection 
including obtaining a patient/client history, assessing vital signs, 
and functional ability levels.
GDPT 816 Community Health Initiatives 1
1 credit
The purpose of this course is for students to understand their 
expanding professional roles in the community. In the first course 
of this sequence, students will gain exposure to basic terminology 
regarding service-learning and community-engaged teaching 
as it applies to the student physical therapist. They will explore 
topics including the dimensions of wellness, health promotion, 
health care disparities, social determinants of health, primary/
secondary/tertiary prevention, and community/population health. 
Oral discussion, reflective writing, and student directed readings 
are used to link social responsibility with professional role in the 
community. 
GDPT 818 Foundations in Human Movement
GDPT 819 Foundations in Human Movement Lab
6 credits
This course is an in-depth analysis of normal and pathological 
human motion that provides a framework for much of the basic 
and applied foundation and clinical content areas of the physical 
therapy curriculum. A major emphasis is placed on normal 
anatomical structure and function. Incorporated within the course 
is a study of the pathological mechanisms affecting human 
movements. Basic theories of biomechanics and kinesiology are 
presented, along with application of these principles to biologic 
tissues, providing students with the necessary principles to analyze 
the forces generated by muscles and the forces applied to joints 
during gait and other activities. Fundamental patient evaluation 
procedures of palpation, joint motion, strength assessment, gait, 
posture assessment movement/task analysis, and sensory and reflex 
testing are also presented. Laboratory experiences are designed to 
enhance, integrate and apply lecture concepts.
GDPT 821 Examination, Evaluation, and Intervention for 
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Dysfunction 1
2 credits
GDPT 823 Examination, Evaluation, and Intervention for 
Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Dysfunction 2
3 credits
These courses provide an integrated approach to the study 
of normal movement and movement system dysfunction of 
cardiovascular and pulmonary systems related to the International 
Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) Model 
including relevant physiologic, anatomic, pathologic, differential 
diagnoses, pharmacology, imaging, medical and therapeutic 
concepts associated with these systems. The context of the course 
fosters evidence-based practice and is set within the framework of 
patient/client management model. Understanding the implications 
of psychosocial, cultural, economic, and vocational aspects of 
impairment and disability are incorporated into case discussions. 
The course offers lecture, clinical case-based discussion and 
laboratory learning experiences building on patient/client 
problems that facilitate development of student competencies 
linked to cardiovascular/pulmonary movement system function 
and dysfunction.
 
Part 1 (GDPT 821): The first course in this two-part series focuses 
primarily on examination, evaluation, diagnosis, prognosis, and 
interventions of movement dysfunction of the cardiovascular 
system. The impact of acute and chronic cardiovascular 
system dysfunction with pulmonary implications are studied. 
Interconnections of the cardiovascular system with diabetes 
mellitus and peripheral vascular disease are explored with an 
introduction to the sequelae of amputation. Exercise physiology 
concepts are reviewed including how the autonomic nervous system 
affects the cardiac and pulmonary systems during movement and 
the exercise response.
Part 2 (GDPT 823): This second course in the two-part series 
focuses primarily on examination, evaluation, diagnosis, prognosis, 
and interventions of movement dysfunction of the pulmonary 
system. The impacts of acute and chronic pulmonary dysfunction 
are emphasized with interconnections to the cardiovascular 
and peripheral vascular systems. Structure and function of the 
pulmonary systems, mechanics of ventilation/perfusion, lung 
volumes and capacity constructs are integrated within the context 
of pathologies, diagnostic testing (including arterial blood gases), 
mechanical ventilation, and interventions that optimize breathing or 
149
Physical Therapy
promote airway clearance and improve movement system function. 
Basic concepts about anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology of 
the vascular, lymphatic and integumentary systems are identified 
as related to wound physiology, and normal and abnormal healing.
GDPT 826 Community Health Initiatives 2
1 credit
In the second course of this sequence, students take a more active 
role in work with community partners. Basic concepts of educational 
theory and development of behavioral objectives related to teaching 
and learning are introduced and applied to work with community 
partners. Cultural competency and differences within individuals 
and among cultural groups are introduced. Communication, health 
promotion and wellness, and professional roles and values are 
reinforced as students engage with new community partners.
GDPT 822 Examination, Evaluation and Intervention  
for Musculoskeletal Movement Dysfunction  
of the Extremities
GDPT 824 Examination, Evaluation and Intervention  
for Musculoskeletal Movement Dysfunction  
of the Extremities Lab
9 credits
The GDPT 822 and 824 course sequence is an integrated approach to 
the study of relevant physiologic, anatomic, pathologic, medical and 
therapeutic concepts related to musculoskeletal aspects of physical 
therapy practice of the extremities. The course includes the physical 
therapy evaluation process, physical therapeutic techniques and 
procedures, reimbursable documentation and patient care program 
development from a collaborative management approach. The 
course offers classroom, laboratory and clinical field experiences 
building from simple to complex problems to assist the student in 
developing necessary competencies in musculoskeletal physical 
therapy. Experiences related to psychological, social, cultural, 
economic and vocational aspects of impairment and disability are 
included. The course offers learning experiences using the problem 
oriented case study approach, organized around the musculoskeletal 
system, with an orientation toward health maintenance, promotion 
and prevention of disease and disability.
GDPT 825 Examination, Evaluation and Intervention 
for Musculoskeletal Movement Dysfunction  
of the Spine
GDPT 827 Examination, Evaluation and Intervention  
for Musculoskeletal Movement Dysfunction  
of the Spine Lab
4 credits
The GDPT 825 and 827 course sequence is an integrated approach 
to the study of relevant physiologic, anatomic, pathologic, 
medical and therapeutic concepts related to musculoskeletal 
aspects of physical therapy practice in the spine. This course will 
follow the same format and build on concepts and skills taught 
in GDPT 822 and 824. The course includes the physical therapy 
evaluation process, physical therapeutic techniques and procedures, 
reimbursable documentation and patient care program development 
from a collaborative management approach. The course offers 
classroom, laboratory and clinical field experiences. Experiences 
related to psychological, social, cultural, economic and vocational 
aspects of impairment and disability are included. The course 
offers learning experiences using the problem oriented case study 
approach, organized around the musculoskeletal system, with an 
orientation toward health maintenance, promotion and prevention 
of disease and disability.
GDPT 830 Health Care Systems and Policy 2
2 credits
Physical therapy practice related to insurance regulations for 
documentation, billing and reimbursement varies in each setting. 
As the first year physical therapy student prepares to enter into the 
outpatient setting, this course will facilitate a deeper awareness 
of the physical therapists’ role in the outpatient setting. Using a 
blended classroom and online module approach to this course, 
the student will develop an understanding of the legal, ethical and 
compliance standards for patient care in the outpatient physical 
therapy practice setting, their responsibilities related to supervision 
of physical therapist assistants, and the process related to emergency 
preparedness in patient care.
GDPT 831 Foundations in Geriatrics
2 credits
Foundations in Geriatrics is part of the lifespan content of the 
curriculum and complements the Foundations in Pediatrics 
course. Normal versus pathologic aging of all body systems will 
be defined. Common pathologies associated with aging will be 
considered. Specific examination, evaluation, diagnosis, prognosis, 
and interventions for the elderly will be identified. The impact of 
psychosocial aspects of aging are considered as they affect the 
health and well-being of the older adult. Ethical, legal, and health 
care issues specific to the geriatric population will be discussed.
GDPT 832 Clinical Experience 1 (10 weeks)
5 credits
This is a ten-week, full-time clinical experience provided primarily 
throughout the United States. The experience is designed to provide 
the student with the opportunity to develop competency in the 
management of patients with musculoskeletal dysfunction. 
GDPT 841 Foundations in Pediatrics
4 credits
An in-depth study of the theories and concepts related to normal 
motor development and motor control. Building upon this 
foundation, the course provides an integrated approach to the 
study of all relevant physiologic, anatomic, pathological, medical 
and therapeutic concerns related to pediatric musculoskeletal and 
cardiopulmonary physical therapy practice. This course includes 
the physical therapy evaluation process, physical therapeutic 
techniques and procedures, and patient care program development 
from a collaborative management paradigm. The course offers 
learning experiences using direct patient care opportunities in 
150
laboratory and clinical settings to assist the student in developing 
some of the instrumental competencies in pediatric physical therapy. 
Experiences related to psychological, social, cultural, economic, 
and vocational aspects of impairment and disability of acute, sub-
acute and chronic cardiopulmonary and musculoskeletal care are 
included. The course offers learning experiences presented using the 
problem/case study approach, organized around the musculoskeletal 
and cardiopulmonary systems, with an orientation toward health 
maintenance and promotion and prevention of disease.
GDPT 843 Examination, Evaluation, and Intervention  
for Neuromuscular Movement Dysfunction 1
GDPT 845 Examination, Evaluation, and Intervention for 
Neuromuscular Movement Dysfunction 1 Lab
4 credits
An integrated approach to the study of relevant physiologic, 
anatomic, pathologic, medical and therapeutic concepts related 
to pediatric neurological physical therapy practice. The course 
includes the physical therapy evaluation process, physical 
therapeutic techniques and procedures, and patient care program 
development from a collaborative management paradigm. The 
course offers learning experiences using direct patient care 
opportunities in the laboratory through the utilization of children 
from various community resources to assist the student in 
developing the necessary competencies of physical therapy practice 
in these areas. The course offers learning experiences using the 
problem/case study approach, organized around the body system, 
with an orientation toward health maintenance and promotion and 
prevention of disease and disability.
GDPT 844 Evidence-Based Practice 2
1 credit
Students will advance their evidence-based practice skill selecting 
databases of synthesized evidence rather than primary resources 
to answer focused clinical questions. Quality Appraisal of various 
types of outcomes, self-report outcomes and qualitative research 
paradigms are introduced. Utilizing the synthesized evidence 
databases, students will individually develop an annotated 
bibliography related to evidence-based practice topics that are 
faculty developed and lead.
GDPT 847 Clinical Synthesis 1
1 credit
This course is designed to facilitate in the physical therapy student 
the ability to synthesize clinical data with the research evidence 
supporting the examination and treatment of the selected diagnoses. 
The student will be required to analyze the literature regarding a 
selected case, facilitate a discussion of examination findings and 
treatment selection in a group setting with colleagues, and critique 
and reflect upon their previous examination and treatment of the 
case. A comprehensive examination is incorporated in this course 
to assist in review and synthesis of information presented during 
the first year of the curriculum.
GDPT 848 Neuroscience
GDPT 849 Neuroscience Lab
5 credits
This course is a study of structure and function of the human central 
and peripheral nervous system including vascular components 
and special senses. The course emphasizes nervous system 
control of movement. Laboratory sessions include human nervous 
system material as depicted in the course lab manual and atlas, 
brain sections, and anatomical models. The course uses clinical 
correlations to reinforce comprehension of structure and function.
GDPT 850 Health Care Systems and Policy 3
2 credits
Physical therapists work within the healthcare system, and 
have responsibilities and reimbursement impacted by health 
policy. This course will facilitate second year physical therapy 
students’ awareness of their role as a physical therapist related to 
reimbursement, ethics, advocacy, and team-based patient care. The 
student will develop an understanding of the configuration of the 
US health care system and the delivery of physical therapy services, 
including the types of financing for these services.
GDPT 851 Evidence-Based Practice Guidance 3
1 credit
The purpose of this course is for student groups to work with 
their EBP Content advisors to continue developing and refining 
their evidence-based practice skills. Under the guidance of their 
content advisor, student EBP groups will synthesize: a written 
narrative review of the literature related to their evidence-based 
project topic; and, prepare and present to peers a synopsis of their 
EBP topic. Content advisors will also assist their student group to 
identify research design methods and data analyses for a specific 
problem/purpose statement and/or research question related to 
their EBP topic.
GDPT 853 Examination, Evaluation, and Intervention for 
Neuromuscular Movement Dysfunction 2
GDPT 855 Examination, Evaluation, and Intervention for 
Neuromuscular Movement Dysfunction 2 Lab
9 credits
An integrated approach to the study of relevant physiologic, 
anatomic, pathologic, medical and therapeutic concepts related 
to adult cerebrovascular, traumatic and degenerative neurologic 
physical therapy practice. The course includes the physical therapy 
examination and evaluation process, physical therapeutic techniques 
and procedures, and patient/client care program development from 
a collaborative management paradigm. The course offers learning 
experiences using direct observation and supervised interaction 
in the laboratory and clinic with adult volunteers with various 
neurologic disabilities, to develop the necessary competencies 
of physical therapy practice in these areas. Also incorporated are 
direct patient care opportunities in the clinical setting through 
the use of experienced clinicians working with the students in a 
clinical mentoring program. The course offers learning experiences 
151
Physical Therapy
which include the use of problem based/case study approach, 
organized around the body system, with an orientation toward 
health maintenance and promotion and prevention of disease and 
disability.
GDPT 854 Evidence-Based Practice 3
The purpose of this course is for students to continue to develop 
and refine their evidence-based practice skills. The course will 
culminate with a group written synthesized narrative review of the 
literature for their evidence-based project topic, under the guidance 
of their content advisor. Student will learn to identify and describe 
research design methods and data analyses for a specific problem 
statement and/or research question. Students will also demonstrate 
an understanding of the legal and ethical standards required when 
designing and conducting a research study that uses human subjects.
GDPT 856 Community Health Initiatives 3
1 credit
In the third course of this sequence, students collaborate with 
community partners and peers to complete two distinct service-
learning projects. Development of professional skills, attitudes 
and values is fostered through community and peer engagement. 
Students develop, deliver, and evaluate at least one community 
educational presentation that addresses community-identified 
needs. Students deepen their understanding of differences in health 
care practices among individuals and culture groups.
GDPT 860 Health Care Systems and Policy 4
1 credit
The American Physical Therapy Association (APTA) identified 
their vision statement as “Transforming society by optimizing 
movement to improve the human experience.” The Health Care 
System and Policy 4 (GDPT 860) and 5 (GDPT 870) courses 
apply this vision statement through collaborative group project 
assignments that incorporate the development of a simulated 
health-focused physical therapy programs. Through the project 
development, the students gain an appreciation for the role of 
business literacy in health care transformation and the necessity for 
excellence in professional skills. This course introduces the theories 
and application of management activities including personnel 
relations, budgeting, planning, organizing, and operating a physical 
therapy program in a variety of health settings.
GDPT 861 Evidence-Based Practice Guidance (Elective)
1 credit
The purpose of this course is for student evidence-based practice 
groups, who elect to continue their evidence-based practice project, 
to develop a detailed plan for completing their project. Students will 
be required to discuss the comparative merits of the various methods 
of evidence-based practice communication and select the method 
which best suits their project. Students will be required to develop 
a contract with their faculty advisor which specifically details their 
project and includes a strategy for searching and synthesizing the 
literature. This contract will detail the expectations for progression 
of evidence-based practice project through 7th and 8th semesters 
of the program. End products for the Faculty-Student Evidence-
Based Practice Contract may include but are not limited to synthesis 
of a research report or article ready for publication; platform or 
poster presentation; Case Report; Special Topic Reviews (such as 
systematic reviews, groups of tests/measures, clinical predictor 
rules); or Journal Club with regularly scheduled meetings with 
specifically focused topics. Data analysis procedures using SPSS 
will be offered and available to students whose end product requires 
quantitative analysis of data. 
GDPT 862 Clinical Experience 2
5 credits
Ten-week full-time clinical experience provided primarily 
throughout the United States. The experiences are designed to 
provide the student with the opportunity to develop competence in 
the management of patients with neurologic, orthopedic and cardiac 
dysfunction in a variety of settings, including but not limited to, 
acute care, inpatient rehabilitation, or skilled nursing facility.
GDPT 866 Community Health Initiatives 4
1 credit
In the fourth course in this sequence, students learn to: 1) compare 
the levels of the health literacy and identify adaptive educational 
techniques to use with individuals throughout the ranges of health 
literacy; 2) apply advocacy concepts for the health and wellness 
needs at the individual level; and, 3) develop a Capstone project 
proposal in collaboration with a student-selected community 
organization. The project will meet the needs or objectives 
identified by the organization. The project can take any form 
mutually agreed upon by the course coordinator, faculty mentor 
and student, providing it meets required proposal guidelines. 
Examples of an organization’s needs include but are not limited to: 
educational presentations, marketing plans, consultation, advocacy, 
or assistance with the organization’s sponsored events. Capstone 
project proposal outcomes reflect a plan that blends meeting the 
community partner’s needs/objectives with continued development 
of students’ Professional Core Values.
GDPT 867 Clinical Synthesis 2
1 credit
This course is designed to facilitate in the physical therapy student 
the ability to synthesize clinical data with the research evidence 
supporting the examination and treatment of the selected diagnoses. 
Within the structure of the course, the student is required to 1) 
analyze the literature regarding the self-selected patient case, 2) 
facilitate a discussion of these findings in a small group setting with 
colleagues, 3) synthesize the group’s findings with evidence-based 
practice in an expert panel classroom presentation, and 4) critique 
and reflect upon the previous examination and treatment selections 
of the patient cases. A comprehensive exam will be given in the 
course which reflects content from the previous five semesters 
as a preparatory experience for the National Physical Therapy 
Examination (NPTE).
152
GDPT 870 Health Care Systems and Policy 5
2 credits
The American Physical Therapy Association (APTA) identified 
their vision statement as “Transforming society by optimizing 
movement to improve the human experience.” The Health Care 
System and Policy 4 (GDPT 860) and 5 (GDPT 870) courses 
apply this vision statement through collaborative group project 
assignments that incorporate the development of a simulated 
health-focused physical therapy program. Through the project 
development, the students gain an appreciation for the role of 
business literacy in health care transformation and the necessity 
for excellence in professional skills. This course continues to build 
on the foundational business and management practices presented 
in Health Care System and Policy 4 (GDPT 860), and includes 
professional development skills related to resume development, 
application of interview skills and networking practice.
GDPT 872 Clinical Experience 3
4 credits
This is an eight-week, full-time clinical experience provided in 
a variety of health care settings. The experience is structured to 
provide the student with the opportunity to develop competency 
in the management of patients with acute or chronic dysfunction. 
GDPT 873 Examination, Evaluation, and Intervention  
for Integumentary and Multi-System  
Movement Dysfunction 
4 credits
This course integrates information from prior system courses 
with the added complexity associated with the patient with multi-
system dysfunction. Systems reviewed in more detail will include 
immunologic, integumentary, urogenital and gastroenteric, as 
they apply to the physical therapy examination, evaluation and 
intervention of patients with multi-system dysfunction with 
consideration for genomics, hematologic conditions, nutritional 
needs, neoplastic conditions. Previous course work will be used 
as a foundation for developing patient care management skills 
specific to patients with prosthetics, pelvic floor dysfunction 
and obesity. Aspects of impairment and disability related to 
psychological, social, economic and/or vocational issues and needs 
are included. The course offers lectures, laboratory activities with 
peers and community volunteers, evidence-based practice reading 
assignments, clinical observation experience, and problem-oriented 
case discussions building from simple to complex patient/client 
scenarios, all to develop the necessary competencies of physical 
therapy practice in these areas.
GDPT 874 Evidence-Based Practice 4 (Elective)
GDPT 871 Evidence-Based Practice Guidance 4 (Elective)
2 credits
Students will progress through the course by completing the work 
detailed by the Faculty-Student Evidence-Based Practice Contract 
established in the previous semester. End products for the Faculty-
Student Evidence-Based Practice Contract may include but are 
not limited to synthesis of a research report or article ready for 
publication; platform or poster presentation; Case Report; Special 
Topic Reviews (such as systematic reviews, groups of tests/
measures, clinical predictor rules); or Journal Club with regularly 
scheduled meetings with specifically focused topics. Progress 
toward the identified end product of the contract is required. 
GDPT 882 Clinical Experience 4
6 credits
This is a twelve-week, full-time clinical experience provided 
primarily throughout the United States. The experience is designed 
to provide the student with the opportunity to develop advanced 
skills in the management of patients in an interest area or to 
practice in a unique setting. This experience will also emphasize the 
administrative, consultative and diagnostic role of the autonomous 
physical therapist.
GDPT 884 Evidence-Based Practice 5 (Elective)
GDPT 881 Evidence-Based Practice Guidance 5 (Elective)
2 credits
Students will progress through the course by completing the work 
detailed by the Faculty-Student Evidence-Based Practice Contract 
established in the previous semester. End products for the Faculty-
Student Evidence-Based Practice Contract may include but are 
not limited to synthesis of a research report or article ready for 
publication; platform or poster presentation; Case Report; Special 
Topic Reviews (such as systematic reviews, groups of tests/
measures, clinical predictor rules); or Journal Club with regularly 
scheduled meeting with specifically focused topics. Progress toward 
the identified end product of the contract is required.
GDPT 886 Community Health Initiatives 5
1 credit
In this final capstone course students complete their community 
Capstone project as per their proposal developed in GDPT 866: 
Community Health Initiative 4. Students will demonstrate their role 
as an educator and/or advocacy at the individual level. Students 
share their project outcomes with other student physical therapists 
and community members through oral and/or visual presentations; 
and prepare a written summary about community Capstone 
project outcomes that reflect how the community partner’s needs/
objectives were progressed and/or achieved; and, on how Capstone 
Project contributed to the development of students’ Professional 
Core Values.
153
Physician Assistant Science
GDPT 887 Clinical Synthesis 3
2 credits
This course is designed to facilitate in the physical therapy student 
the synthesis of clinical data with the research evidence supporting 
the management of selected patient(s). Within the structure of the 
course, the student is required to analyze the literature, facilitate 
a discussion of these findings in a group setting with colleagues, 
and critique and reflect upon their management of patient(s). The 
course incorporates self-assessment, group activities, and practice 
examinations as part of exam preparation for the National Physical 
Therapy Examination (NPTE).
GDPT 899 Independent Study (Elective)
1-3 credits
This course enables students to enrich their knowledge and 
competency in an advanced area of interest related to PT practice. 
The student designs the objectives of the learning experience(s) with 
guidance from the Independent Study Course Coordinator and a 
faculty member (content advisor) by means of a learning contract. 
Only the student’s motivation and the availability of the selected 
experience may limit the type of independent study experience. 
The independent study focuses on enrichment; a new and varied 
advanced learning opportunity. Independent study may not be 
used to remediate existing didactic or clinical deficiencies (i.e., 
incompletes or below mastery standing). Through this learning 
experience, the student will acquire and demonstrate a new or 
enhanced body of knowledge.
Physician 
Assistant Science
Interim Program Director: Kristen Grippe, MPAS, PA-C
INTRODUCTION
Physician assistants (PAs) are medical providers who are nationally 
certified and state licensed to practice medicine as a member of a 
team with other healthcare professionals. Their specific tasks vary 
widely due to differences among state laws and hospital policies.
Generally, PAs are qualified to obtain patient histories, perform 
comprehensive physical examinations, order and interpret 
diagnostic laboratory tests, prepare a diagnosis, implement a 
treatment plan for common illnesses, deliver patient education 
and counseling, perform certain surgical procedures, and provide 
emergency care. PAs may assist in surgery and deliver pre-operative 
and post-operative care. PAs may deliver patient care in any setting 
in which the physician works.
The Physician Assistant Department offers a Master of Physician 
Assistant Science degree available through either a five-year 
undergraduate admission program or a post baccalaureate 
curriculum. The curriculum is predominantly clinical during the 
final year of the program. Regional clinical faculty preceptors, 
in conjunction with various health care institutions, introduce 
the students to professional PA training. Clinical sites are offered 
primarily in northwestern Pennsylvania, Ohio, and western 
New York, as well as some locations farther afield. Students are 
responsible for their own housing and transportation to and from 
clinical sites.
The PA program curriculum of the Gannon University Physician 
Assistant Program is accredited by the Accreditation Review 
Commission on Education for the Physician Assistant, Inc.  
(ARC-PA).
The Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the 
Physician Assistant (ARC-PA) has granted Accreditation-
Continued status to the Gannon University Physician Assistant 
Program sponsored by Gannon University. Accreditation-
Continued is an accreditation status granted when a currently 
accredited program is in compliance with the ARC-PA Standards.
Accreditation remains in effect until the program closes or 
withdraws from the accreditation process or until accreditation 
is withdrawn for failure to comply with the Standards. The 
approximate date for the next validation review of the program by 
the ARC-PA will be March 2027. The review date is contingent 
upon continued compliance with the Accreditation Standards and 
ARC-PA policy.
154
OUTCOMES/OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of the Physician Assistant Program the student 
will be able to:
•	 Perform a complete and accurate history and physical exam-
ination; identify abnormal findings and develop an appropriate 
differential diagnosis
•	 Develop a plan of evaluation in support of the differential 
diagnosis, including specialized diagnostic imaging, and 
pathologic modalities
•	 Develop a treatment plan consisting of surgical and medical 
interventions including non-pharmacological modalities such 
as physical therapy, counseling and patient education through 
analysis of clinical and laboratory data
•	 Accurately relate the clinical data to the other members of 
the health care team, forming a collaborative effort to assure 
maximal patient benefit through a multi-disciplinary approach
•	 Show proficiency in performing clinical skills
•	 Identify characteristics of professional and ethical conduct for 
the Physician Assistant Profession
•	 Synthesize theory and research in order to provide advanced 
care to patients
TECHNICAL STANDARDS
A candidate for admission to the PA Program must have the use 
of certain sensory and motor functions to permit them to carry 
out the activities described in the sections that follow. Graduation 
from the program signifies that the individual is prepared for 
entry into clinical practice or into postgraduate training programs. 
Therefore, it follows that graduates must have the knowledge and 
skills needed to function in a broad variety of clinical situations 
and to render a wide spectrum of diagnostic and therapeutic care. 
The candidate and student must be able consistently, quickly, and 
accurately to integrate all information received by whatever sense(s) 
are employed. Also, they must have the intellectual ability to learn, 
integrate, analyze, and synthesize data.
A candidate for the PA Program ordinarily must have the following 
abilities and skills as explained below: observation; communication; 
motor; intellectual, conceptual, integrative, and quantitative; and 
behavioral and social. Where technological assistance is available 
in the program, it may be permitted for disabilities in certain areas. 
Under all circumstances, a candidate should be able to perform the 
following tasks in a reasonably independent manner:
I. Observation: Candidates and students ordinarily must have 
sufficient vision to be able to observe demonstrations, experiments, 
and laboratory exercises. They must be able to observe a patient 
accurately at a distance and close at hand. 
II. Communication: Candidates and students ordinarily must be 
able to communicate with patients and colleagues. They should 
be able to hear, but if technological compensation is available, it 
may be permitted for some handicaps in this area. Candidates and 
students must be able to read, write, and speak English. 
III. Motor: Candidates and students ordinarily should have 
sufficient motor function such that they are able to execute 
movements reasonably required to provide general care and 
emergency treatment to patients. Examples of emergency treatment 
reasonably required of physician assistants is cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation, administration of intravenous medication, the 
application of pressure to stop bleeding, the opening of obstructed 
airways, the suturing of simple wounds, and the performance of 
simple obstetrical maneuvers. These actions require coordination 
of both gross and fine muscular movements, equilibrium, and 
functional use of the senses of touch and vision. 
IV. Intellectual, Conceptual, Integrative, and Quantitative Abilities: 
These abilities include measurement, calculation, reasoning, 
analysis, and synthesis. Problem solving, the critical intellectual 
skill demanded of a physician assistant, requires all of these 
intellectual abilities. In addition, candidates and students should be 
able to comprehend three-dimensional relationships and understand 
the spatial relationships of structures. 
V. Behavioral and Social Abilities: Candidates and students must 
possess the emotional health required for full utilization of the 
intellectual abilities, the exercise of good judgment, the prompt 
completion of all responsibilities attendant to the assessment and 
care of patients, and the development of mature, sensitive, and 
effective relationships with patients. Candidates and students must 
be able to tolerate physically taxing workloads, adapt to changing 
environments, display flexibility, and learn to function in the face 
of uncertainties inherent in the clinical problems of many patients. 
Compassion, integrity, concern for others, interpersonal skills, 
interest, and motivation are all personal qualities to be assessed 
during the admissions and educational processes.
The PA Department is committed to providing reasonable 
accommodations to students with an identified disability as defined 
by the Americans with Disability Act. In doing so, however, the 
PA Department must maintain the integrity of its curriculum and 
preserve those elements deemed essential to educating candidates 
to become effective physician assistants.
Students in the PA Program must be of sufficient health and be able 
to obtain all required clearances (criminal, child abuse and FBI 
Background checks annually) to meet the criteria of the program 
and our clinical affiliates. The PA Department reserves the right to 
reassess the student’s ability to meet the program requirements and 
technical standards at any time during the duration of their training 
and to act accordingly. 
EMPLOYMENT POLICY
Employment during the didactic phase of the PA program is not 
recommended. Demanding courses and time constraints are to be 
expected. Employment during the clinical phase of the PA Program 
is strongly discouraged. Students will spend an average of 40 hours 
a week on clinical site, plus complete reading assignments in order 
to prepare for end of rotation exams. Students may need to relocate 
155
Physician Assistant Science
every five weeks, precluding steady employment. Students who 
choose to work may jeopardize performance and continuation in 
the program.
MASTER OF PHYSICIAN ASSISTANT 
SCIENCE CURRICULUM
5 YEAR OPTION
Undergraduate Courses
(See the undergraduate catalog for the complete curriculum.)
DIDACTIC YEAR
Fall Semester	
GPHAS 511	 	
Physical Diagnosis I	
5
GPHAS 513	 	
Physical Diag Lab II	
1
GPHAS 514	 	
Medical Lecture Series I	
3
GPHAS 524	 	
Pharmacotherapeutics I	
3
GPHAS 531	 	
Clinical Science 1	
3
GRADS 541	 	
Intro to Radiology	
3
Total		
	
	
18
Spring Semester
GPHAS 508	 	
Behavioral Medicine	
1
GPHAS 515	 	
Medical Lecture Series II	
6
GPHAS 516	 	
Physical Diag Lab III	
1
GPHAS 525	 	
Pharmacotherapeutics II	
2
GPHAS 532	 	
Clinical Science II	
2
GPHAS 538	 	
PEDS/OB/GYN Lec Series	
4
GPHAS 545	 	
Problem Based Medicine	
2
Total		
	
	
18
GRADUATE PHASE ONLY
Summer (start of Graduate phase)
GPHAS 600	 	
Pre-Rot Lec Series Lab	
1
GPHAS 601	 	
Pre-Rot Lec Series	
4
GPHAS 602	 	
Bus Prac and Cur Iss for PAs	
2
GPHAS 614	 	
General Surgery Rotation	
5
Total		
	
	
12
FIFTH YEAR 
Fall
GPHAS 616	 	
Clinical Research	
4
GPHAS 617	 	
Family Medicine Rotation I	
5
GPHAS 618	 	
Family Medicine Rotation II	
5
Total		
	
	
14
Spring
GPHAS 619	 	
Family Medicine Rotation III	
5
GPHAS 621	 	
Emergency Med Rotation	
5
GPHAS 622	 	
Fam Med Rotation IV	
5
Total		
	
	
15
Summer
GPHAS 623	 	
Elective Rotation I	
5
GPHAS 624	 	
Elective Rotation II	
5
GPHAS 631	 	
Research/ Project Guidance	
2
GPHAS 634	 	
Clinical and Professional Capstone	
2
Total		
	
	
14
POST BACCALAUREATE OPTION
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS FOR POST-
BACCALAUREATE OPTION:
Applications for the post-baccalaureate option will be reviewed 
on a space available basis. Prospective students may contact the 
Gannon University Office of Graduate Admissions for additional 
information.
Applicants must possess a baccalaureate degree. A minimum 
GPA of 3.0 is required from previous professional education and 
prerequisites must have been completed within the last seven 
years. As part of the application process, applicants must submit 
recommendation letters from three evaluators and participate in 
an in-person interview. In addition, applicants must submit the 
following: official transcripts, curriculum vitae and 30 hours of 
documented volunteer/paid medical experience.
PREREQUISITES
Following are prerequisites for the Post-Baccalaureate option and 
must be completed prior to enrolling:
Major Level Biology	
8 Credits 
Chemistry	
	
	
8 Credits
Medical Terminology (or demonstrated competency)	
3 Credits
Psychology	
	
	
3 Credits
Statistics	
	
	
3 Credits
Prerequisite and undergraduate courses will not be accepted if 
they have been completed over seven years prior to enrollment. 
Advanced standing is not granted in the graduate phase of the 
program. No credits are awarded for experiential learning.
Undergraduate Courses
BIOL 365	
	
Human Anatomy	
3
BIOL 366	
	
Human Anatomy Lab	
1
BIOL 368	
	
Human Physiology	
3
BIOL 369	
	
Human Physiology Lab	
1
BIOL 378	
	
Medical Microbiology	
3
BIOL 379	
	
Medical Microbiology Lab	
1
BIOL 232	
	
Human Genetics	
3
PHAS 363	
	
The Research Process	
3
Total		
	
	
18
156
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GPHAS 508 Behavioral Medicine
1 credit
Prerequisite: GPHAS 514
This course is designed to introduce the students to common 
mental health conditions. It covers issues seen throughout a 
patient’s lifespan. Special attention will be given to disease 
characteristics, etiologies, and applicable behavioral and 
pharmacological treatments. 
GPHAS 511 Physical Diagnosis I
5 credits
The techniques of history-taking and physical examination 
are introduced to the student. Students will learn the art of 
communicating with patients. Normal and abnormal physical 
exam findings are taught in a body system approach. History and 
examination techniques throughout the life span are covered.
GPHAS 513 Physical Diagnosis Lab II
1 credit
Designed to complement the Physical Diagnosis I lectures, this 
laboratory course enables students to develop skills in performing 
histories and physical examinations. This is accomplished 
through the use of system specific physical examinations. 
Demonstration and/or videos are utilized. Students perform skills 
on fellow students, mannikins and/or models. Students practice 
documentation as it relates to patient encounters.
GPHAS 514 Medical Lecture Series I
3 credits
This course covers a variety of medical topics. Symptoms, signs, 
and abnormal body function are taught in a problem-oriented 
manner. Students learn how to approach patient care in a logical 
method, and how to use relevant diagnostic methodology. 
Therapeutic intervention, pharmacologic treatments, and patient 
education are covered.
The lectures complement the knowledge acquired in Physical 
Diagnosis I and is correlated with the Pharmacotherapeutics I and 
Clinical Science I courses.
GPHAS 515 Medical Lecture Series II
6 credits
Prerequisite: GPHAS 514
This course covers a variety of medical topics. Symptoms, signs, 
and abnormal body function are taught in a problem-oriented 
manner. Students learn how to approach patient care in a logical 
method, and how to use relevant diagnostic methodology. 
Therapeutic intervention, pharmacologic treatments, and patient 
education are covered. The lectures complement the knowledge 
acquired in Physical Diagnosis I and is correlated with the 
Pharmacotherapeutics II and Clinical Science II courses.
GPHAS 516 Physical Diagnosis Lab III
1 credit
Prerequisites: GPHAS 511; and GPHAS 513
This course is designed to provide students the opportunity to 
perform histories and physical examinations on hospitalized or 
nursing home patients, as well as standardized patients. Student will 
encounter a wide variety of medical conditions and will develop 
a methodology for approaching any presenting medical issue. 
Students will further develop documentation skills and will learn 
how to perform oral presentations to prepare for clinical rotations.
GPHAS 524 Pharmacotherapeutics I
3 credits
This course provides both basic information regarding the 
pharmacology of many commonly used medications coupled with 
a practical and systematic approach to the selection of appropriate 
drug therapy for patients. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
and recommended drug therapy for a variety of medical disorders 
are taught. Lectures correlate with Medical Lecture Series I and 
Clinical Science I courses in a systems-oriented approach to 
disease processes.
GPHAS 525 Pharmacotherapeutics II
2 credits
Prerequisite: GPHAS 524
This course provides both basic information regarding the 
pharmacology of many commonly used medications coupled with 
a practical and systematic approach to the selection of appropriate 
drug therapy for patients. Pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
and recommended drug therapy for a variety of medical disorders 
are taught. Lectures correlate with Medical Lecture Series II and 
Clinical Science II courses in a systems-oriented approach to 
disease processes.
GPHAS 531 Clinical Science I
3 credits
This course is designed to provide a basic understanding of the 
pathophysiology and clinical diagnostic methods used in the 
evaluation of various disease processes. Emphasis is placed on 
understanding application and interpretation of clinical testing 
for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Lectures correlate 
with Physical Diagnosis I and II, Medical Lecture Series I, 
Pharmacotherapeutics I and Radiology in a systems-oriented 
approach to disease processes. 
GPHAS 532 Clinical Science II
2 credits
Prerequisite: GPHAS 531
This course is designed to provide a basic understanding of the 
pathophysiology and clinical diagnostic methods used in the 
evaluation of various disease processes. Emphasis is placed on 
understanding application and interpretation of clinical testing 
for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Lectures correlate with 
Medical Lecture Series II and Pharmacotherapeutics II courses in 
a systems-oriented approach to disease processes.
157
Physician Assistant Science
GPHAS 538 Pediatrics/Obstetrics/Gynecology  
Lecture Series
4 credits
Prerequisite: GPHAS 514
This course will discuss common disease process in Obstetrics/ 
Gynecology and Pediatrics in a problem oriented manner to enable 
the student to incorporate knowledge of pathogenesis, clinical 
findings, appropriate laboratory and diagnostic testing and create 
a treatment plan for each disease process.
GRADS 541 Introduction to Radiology
3 credits
This course is designed to introduce the Physician Assistant 
student to radiology, computerized tomography (CT), and magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI). The focus of the class will include 
technical, anatomical and pathologic considerations.
GPHAS 545 Problem Based Medicine
2 credits
Prerequisite: GPHAS 514
This course offers the student an introduction to evidence based 
medicine. Emphasis will be placed on clinical problem solving 
through a case study approach. The student will be instructed to 
incorporate knowledge of pathogenesis, clinical findings, laboratory 
and other diagnostics to develop a differential diagnosis. This 
approach is designed to initiate critical thinking about medical 
problems and incorporation of treatment plans.
GPHAS 600 Pre-Rotation Lecture Lab
1 credit
Prerequisites: Successful completion of PHAS 408-445 
or GPHAS 508-545
This course provides a hands-on laboratory experience to learn 
clinical procedures and skills commonly used by medical providers. 
Students will learn through the use of models or manikins and may 
use the Patient Simulation Center. They will have an operating room 
orientation and become certified in cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
and advanced cardiovascular life support. This lab is designed to 
complement and integrate the Pre-Rotation Lecture Series course.
GPHAS 601 Pre-Rotation Lectures and Skills
4 credits
Prerequisites: Successful completion of PHAS 408-445 
or GPHAS 508-545
This course is designed to transition students from the didactic year 
to the clinical year. It will prepare students for clinical rotations and 
complements the Pre-Rotation Lecture and Skills Lab. Students are 
expected to review information previously learned in the didactic 
year and apply concepts and methodologies as they relate to short 
and long-term patient care. Information will also be presented to 
include topics related to diverse populations and patient advocacy. 
GPHAS 602 Business Practices and Current Issues  
for Physician Assistants
2 credits
Prerequisites: Successful completion of PHAS 408-445 
or GPHAS 508-545
This course is designed to introduce the Physician Assistant student 
to practice management in the clinical setting. Emphasis is placed 
on understanding health insurance coverage, cost containment 
and the quality of health care. Diagnosis and procedure coding 
will be introduced and legal issues related to the clinical setting 
are addressed.
GPHAS 614 General Surgery Rotation
5 credits
Prerequisites: Enrollment in or successful completion 
of GPHAS 600, GPHAS 601, GPHAS 602
This five-week clinical experience is designed to allow the student 
exposure to a wide variety of acute surgical problems. Under 
supervision, the student is expected to participate in preoperative 
and postoperative patient care. This experience will include taking 
histories, performing physical examinations, and assisting in the 
emergency department and operating room.
GPHAS 616 Clinical Research
4 credits
Prerequisites: Enrollment in or successful completion 
of GPHAS 600, GPHAS 601, GPHAS 602
This is a four-week rotation in which students participate in 
medical research under the direction of a preceptor or develop a 
community health project. This project may involve reviewing 
charts, interviewing patients, reviewing existing data, collecting 
data and/or participating in ongoing clinical trials or educating the 
public. Students are required to complete a project outline and will 
begin to compose a research or project paper of publishable quality. 
The students will begin to develop a power point presentation in 
order to illustrate their research or project.
GPHAS 617 Family Medicine Rotation I
5 credits
Prerequisites: Enrollment in or successful completion 
of GPHAS 600, GPHAS 601, GPHAS 602
This five-week clinical experience is designed to familiarize the 
student with all aspects of Family Practice in ambulatory, inpatient 
and long-term care settings. The student, through the collection and 
acquisition of historical, physical and laboratory data, develops 
an understanding of patient evaluation and treatment under the 
supervision of physicians or mid-level practitioners. This clinical 
rotation will emphasize aspects of Internal Medicine and the unique 
characteristics of the care of the geriatric patient.
GPHAS 618 Family Medicine Rotation II
5 credits
Prerequisites: Enrollment in or successful completion 
of GPHAS 600, GPHAS 601, GPHAS 602
158
This five-week clinical experience is designed to familiarize 
the student with all aspects of Family Practice in ambulatory, 
inpatient and long-term care settings. The student, through the 
collection and acquisition of historical, physical and laboratory 
data, develops an understanding of patient evaluation and treatment 
under the supervision of physicians or mid-level practitioners. This 
clinical rotation will emphasize normal variations of growth and 
development of children from infancy to adolescence, as well as, 
exposure to acute and chronic illnesses of childhood.
GPHAS 619 Family Medicine Rotation III
5 credits
Prerequisites: Enrollment in or successful completion 
of GPHAS 600, GPHAS 601, GPHAS 602
This five-week clinical experience is designed to familiarize the 
student with all aspects of Family Practice in ambulatory, inpatient 
and long-term care settings. The student, through the collection and 
acquisition of historical, physical and laboratory data, develops 
an understanding of patient evaluation and treatment under the 
supervision of physicians or mid-level practitioners. This clinical 
rotation will emphasize routine gynecologic care and common 
complaints as well as prenatal care of the female patient. This 
experience will also focus on common behavioral health disorders 
encountered in primary care.
GPHAS 621 Emergency Medicine Rotation
5 credits
Prerequisites: Enrollment in or successful completion 
of GPHAS 600, GPHAS 601, GPHAS 602
This five-week clinical experience is designed to stress the 
evaluation and management of both medical and surgical problems 
of the ambulatory patient in an acute care situation. Students gain 
experience in the initial evaluation of patients in the emergency 
setting, perform problem specific examinations, practice minor 
surgery skills, and participate in the management of orthopedic 
problems.
GPHAS 622 Family Medicine Rotation IV
5 credits
Prerequisites: Enrollment in or successful completion 
of GPHAS 600, GPHAS 601, GPHAS 602
This five-week clinical experience is designed to familiarize the 
student with all aspects of Family Practice in ambulatory, inpatient 
and long-term care settings. The student, through the collection and 
acquisition of historical, physical and laboratory data, develops 
an understanding of patient evaluation and treatment under the 
supervision of physicians or mid-level practitioners. This clinical 
rotation will emphasize the evaluation and treatment of conditions 
common at the primary care level and the appropriate health 
maintenance measures for different age groups from infancy 
to geriatrics.
GPHAS 623 Elective Rotation I
5 credits
Prerequisites: Enrollment in or successful completion 
of GPHAS 600, GPHAS 601, GPHAS 602
This five-week clinical experience is designed to acquaint the 
student with the role of the physician assistant in practice. Students 
train under the supervision of a physician or mid-level provider 
in an office/or hospital setting. Through this clinical rotation the 
student will gain an in-depth exposure to a wide spectrum of acute 
and chronic patient problems. This experience can occur in a clinical 
area that has already been experienced by the student or a specialty 
area of the student’s choosing.
GPHAS 624 Elective Rotation II
5 credits
Prerequisites: Enrollment in or successful completion 
of GPHAS 600, GPHAS 601, GPHAS 602
This five-week clinical experience is designed to acquaint the 
student with the role of the physician assistant in practice. Students 
train under the supervision of a physician or mid-level provider 
in an office/or hospital setting. Through this clinical rotation the 
student will gain an in-depth exposure to a wide spectrum of acute 
and chronic patient problems. This experience can occur in a clinical 
area that has already been experienced by the student or a specialty 
area of the student’s choosing.
GPHAS 631 Research/Project Guidance
2 credits
Prerequisites: Enrollment in or successful completion 
of GPHAS 600, GPHAS 601, GPHAS 602
Students complete a research project (including analysis of data and 
reporting results) using the scientific method to answer a question 
in clinical practice, under the direction of a research/project advisor. 
Projects may use a variety of methodologies. Students will finalize 
a power point presentation and/or poster for presentation or display 
at the annual research symposium.
GPHAS 634 Clinical and Professional Capstone
2 credits
Graduation from an accredited PA program qualifies an individual 
to take the Physician Assistant National Certification Examination 
(PANCE). Successful completion of PANCE is mandatory for 
clinical practice as a PA. As the student works to achieve profes-
sional status as a PA, the Clinical and Professional Capstone allows 
for an opportunity to merge the clinical rotation experience with 
classroom learning through a high yield didactic approach and 
culminating with the program Summative Examination. The course 
will provide a comprehensive overview of requisite knowledge for 
the graduating PA student. Emphasis will be placed on identified 
organ systems and task areas that are consistent with the NCCPA 
Examination Content Blueprint for the PANCE. Additionally, the 
Clinical and Professional Capstone will focus on the application 
of knowledge and skills for clinical practice case study and evi-
dence-based medicine facilitating the transition from student to 
medical provider.
159
Public Administration
Public 
Administration
Director: Mengzhong Zhang, Ph.D.
INTRODUCTION
Public Administration involves the study of the management of 
governmental and not for profit entities. It is the who, when, where 
and how policies are formulated, implemented, and evaluated. 
It is where campaign promises are carried out (or not). Gannon 
University’s Master of Public Administration Program provides 
students with the tools they need to be able to be successful as a 
public administration professional and can be completed on a full 
or part time basis. 
Public administration is a rapidly changing field where new ways of 
doing things are continually proposed and where politics and values 
are always in flux. Public administrators are held to high standards 
to be accountable, to be ethical, to be efficient and effective, and 
to be responsive to their constituents. Recent dramatic changes 
in the worlds of politics, government, international relations, 
not-for-profits, and the private sector have cast a new light on the 
importance of leadership within the public sector.
The urgency for leadership studies and development has never 
been greater. A commitment to instilling qualities of leadership in 
students lies at the heart of a Gannon University education. That 
long-standing focus on leadership has become even more intense 
through development of new academic programs and scholarships 
that will uniquely position Gannon graduates to take leadership 
roles in fields that will be most in demand in the next century. 
Governments, agencies, foundations, and authorities are seeking 
highly motivated individuals with communication, critical analysis, 
marketing, finance, strategic planning abilities, grant writing 
experience, program development capabilities, organizational 
skills, and the ability to solve problems creatively.
Gannon is a student-oriented, value-centered teaching university. 
This philosophy guides our approach to teaching, advising, and 
designing our curriculum. We work closely with students on an 
individual basis, challenging students to grow while ensuring they 
meet their personal objectives. Courses are rigorous and challenging 
by design, but we work with students to build the skills they need 
for the world of the new millennium. 
What are the origins of public administration? How has public 
administration evolved and changed? What motivates human 
behavior? What are the differences and similarities between public, 
private, and nonprofit management? What are the various theories 
of organization? What is the science of “muddling through”? 
How are policies formulated and implemented? What is strategic 
planning and how is it done? How are budgets and financial 
statements created? How do we evaluate programs? What role do 
ethical considerations play in public administration and what tools 
exist to help “good people make tough choices”? These are some of 
the questions that students will grapple with during time studying 
the field of public administration at Gannon.
Our central location to city, county, state, and federal government 
offices makes Gannon University a virtual public administration 
laboratory. Our close proximity allows for continuous interaction 
with government and agency leaders who visit classes on a regular 
basis and often serve as instructors themselves. This is a program 
in which real world case studies are often the focus of seminar de-
liberations and class projects. In addition, internship opportunities 
abound. This practical experience adds balance to academic life.
MISSION OF THE MPA PROGRAM
Gannon’s MPA program:
•	 Prepares its graduates to be competent administrators, 
professionals and leaders in public and nonprofit organizations, 
domestically and internationally. 
•	 Educates socially responsible world citizens through civic 
and community engagement and innovation and develops a 
worldview by infusing international perspectives and activities 
into the curriculum.
•	 Is dedicated to emphasizing public service values such as public 
interest, efficiency, effectiveness, democratic representation and 
participation, equity, diversity, sustainability, and accountability.
OUTCOMES OF MPA PROGRAM
As the basis for its curriculum, the program will adopt a set of 
required competencies related to its mission and public service 
values. The required competencies will include five domains: 
the ability 
•	 to lead and manage in public governance;
•	 to participate in and contribute to the policy process;
•	 utilize quantitative methods to analyze, synthesize, think 
critically, solve problems and make decisions;
•	 to articulate and apply a public service perspective;
•	 to communicate and interact productively with a diverse and 
changing workforce and citizenry
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
•	 A Bachelor’s degree in any discipline from an accredited college 
or university
•	 A completed application for admission
•	 Transcripts from all prior institutions attended
•	 TOEFL or IELTS scores if English is not a first language
•	 Students may also be offered “Provisional Acceptance” if their 
GPA is a minimum of 2.7. Provisional acceptance requires 
students to earn a minimum of a 3.0 average in the first three 
Core classes completed in the program within two consecutive 
semesters. If a student does not earn a minimum grade of “B” in 
160
each of the first 9 credits, they will not be permitted to register 
for further MPA courses.
•	 Three letters of recommendation
While applications may be submitted at any time, Gannon reviews 
applications on a rolling basis. Please contact our admissions 
representative to discuss details about our next start date and how 
to apply. Students must complete the application process prior to 
the start date of a given session.
INTERNSHIPS AND  
COOPERATIVE EDUCATION
In consultation with the Director of Graduate Programs, students 
may accept field placements related to their interests and academic 
studies. Placements range from short-term assignments to full-
time positions. If students are looking for experience, internships 
complement book learning and classroom lectures and are also a 
great resume builder. If interested, students can consult the Director 
of Graduate Programs. In some circumstances, elective credits are 
awarded for these placements.
STEM DESIGNATION 
Gannon University’s MPA program is a STEM designated graduate 
program. 
WHAT IS A STEM DESIGNATED DEGREE PROGRAM?
A STEM designated degree program is an academic program 
that falls under one or more of the approved categories from the 
United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS). The DHS 
has a published list of programs that can be classified as STEM 
designated which can be viewed online.
WHAT DOES THE STEM DESIGNATION MEAN?
The programs in the STEM designated list have been recognized by 
the government for their focus on science, technology, engineering, 
and math (STEM) topics. The STEM designation also has special 
implications for international students who are studying in the 
United States on a student F-1 visa. For most international students, 
there is an opportunity to complete work experience following 
the completion of their degree through a program called Optional 
Practical Training (OPT). The standard duration for OPT is 12 
months. However, if the student has completed a STEM approved 
program, OPT can be extended by as much as 24 months for 
a total of 36 months. For any clarification of the I-20 purpose, 
please contact Gannon University’s Office of Global Admissions 
and Outreach. 
CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS
The MPA is a professional degree program. Each student begins 
studies with a wide variety of academic and work backgrounds. 
As such, the design of the curriculum is dependent upon your 
experiences and academic background.
The MPA curriculum requires 36 credits and is outlined as follows: 
Core Curriculum (27 credits)
This series is designed to give you the basic principles and theories 
of public administration along with the necessary skills to help 
students succeed in public administration.
The MPA program is fully face to face on ground program.
MPA Curriculum (36 credits)
GMPA 510	
	
Introduction to Public Administration	
3
GMPA 520	
	
Administrative Ethics 	
3
GMPA 530	
	
Public Personnel Administration	
3
GMPA 540	
	
Applied Statistics for Public and 
	
	 	 	
	
Nonprofit Administration 	
3
GMPA 532	
	
Public Budgeting and Finance	
3
GMPA 533	
	
Public Organizations and Management 	
 3
GMPA 630	
	
The Public Policy Cycles 	
 3
GMPA 799	
	
Research in Public Administration	
 3
GMPA 797	
	
Public Administration Capstone Project 	
3
GMPA	
	
Electives 	
9
Four Concentrations 
[Each concentration requires three courses (9 credits).]
1.	 Global Public Administration (GPA) 
	
(any of the below three courses)
	
•	GMPA 591 Global Comparative Public Administration (3) 
(new course)
	
•	GMPA 592 Globalization and World Politics (3) (new course)
	
•	GMPA 593 Current Issues in Global Public Administration (3) 
(new course)
	
•	GMPA 798 Internship (3) (existing course)
2.	 Nonprofit Organization and Management
	
•		 GMPA 512 Introduction to Nonprofit Organization and 
Management (3)
	
•		 GMPA 594 Nonprofit Management and Leadership (3)
	
•		 GMPA 595 Resource Development for  
Nonprofit Organizations (3)
3.	 Customized Concentration 
	
(any three graduate courses, 9 credits)
	
This special customized concentration is tailored to the scholarly 
or professional development need of the student. In this 
concentration, a student can take any three graduate courses (9 
credits) offered by Gannon University, with the approval of the 
MPA program director as well as the “home” program (where 
concentration courses are offered) director.
Students should consult with the Program Director to determine a 
systematic plan including their choice of electives and a research 
project given their prior course work, their areas of interest, and 
their future career plans.
161
Public Administration
MPA 4+1 Plus Program 
Senior undergraduate students at Gannon University can join 
the 4+1 Master of Public Administration (MPA) Program. 
Undergraduate students may take up to four 3-credit MPA graduate 
courses in their senior year. To complete the remaining graduate 
coursework in one calendar year, students must enroll in the summer 
semester immediately following graduation. For all inquiries, please 
contact the MPA program director.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
500 SERIES COURSES
GMPA 510 Introduction to Public Administration 
3 credits
Prerequisite: This course should be taken in the first 18 credits of 
the MPA program.
This introductory course is set within the context of contemporary, 
political, social, and economic realities. It examines the policies 
and processes of governmental, nonprofit, and institution based 
programs from a multidisciplinary perspective. Students are 
introduced to the field and profession of public administration. 
Students also develop a broad understanding of the public sector 
while learning to think and act as an ethical public administration 
professional.
GMPA 512 Introduction to Nonprofit Organization
3 credits
The nonprofit sector is one of the fastest growing in the United 
States economy. To prepare graduate students for the unique 
challenges and opportunities facing nonprofit organizations, 
students will take this introductory course on the foundations of 
nonprofit organizations. Students will explore the history and policy 
behind nonprofit organizations. Students will investigate the trends 
with nonprofit organizations and research how successful nonprofit 
organizations operate. Lastly, students will examine the basic 
operations of nonprofit organizations, including their structure, 
management, and governance.
GMPA 520 Administrative Ethics 
3 credits
The primary goals of this course are to: (a) introduce students to 
the role that ethics should play in the lives of public administrators 
in various capacities, and (b) provide tools and strategies for 
identifying and addressing ethical issues in professional life.
GMPA 530 Public Personnel Administration 
3 credits
This course covers human resources administration in public and 
nonprofit settings, including human resource planning, staffing, 
development, and compensation. Behavioral and environmental 
determinants are examined, including market factors, service 
delivery, and government regulations and policies.
GMPA 532 Public Budgeting and Finance
3 credits
This course provides an introduction to public budgeting and 
finance. The budgetary process is, perhaps, the most important and 
fundamental component of the public policy process and democratic 
governance. Funding for public programs is inseparable from their 
operation (and existence). Furthermore, the sources of revenue 
for public programs can play an important role in the design of 
government spending. Since the budgetary process is inherently 
political we can understand it as both a political document and a 
management tool. Simply put, budgets are an expression of societal 
values. It is necessary, therefore, for public managers to possess 
the knowledge and skills required to understand the key principles 
of public budgeting and finance.
GMPA 533 Public Organizations and Management
3 credits
This course explores theories of organizational behavior and 
performance as applied to public and nonprofit sector agencies, 
including legal constraints associated with leading public sector 
organizations, organizational authority systems, relationships 
between public and private organizations, development and 
fulfillment of organizational mandates in the public sector, and use 
of resources within organizations.
GMPA 540 Applied Statistics for Public  
and Nonprofit Administration
3 credits
Statistical tools and techniques used to inform policy analysis 
and management decision-making. Covers descriptive statistics, 
graphing data, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, correlation, 
cross-tabulation, mean comparison with significance testing, 
and an introduction to multivariate linear regression. The course 
encourages hands-on work with real data, use of statistical software, 
and the effective presentation of statistical information.
GMPA 591 Global Comparative Public Administration
3 credits
Global Comparative Public Administration is an elective course 
in the Gannon University’s MPA program. This 3-credit course 
focuses on providing an introduction to the field of global 
comparative public administration, with primary focus on national 
administrative systems including reforms and capacity building 
efforts. This course covers contents of scope and history of global 
comparative public administration, focus for comparison, global 
public administration, concepts of system transformation, historical 
antecedents of national administrative systems, bureaucracy, 
comparative research and methods, administration in developed 
and less developed nations and an overview of bureaucracies.
GMPA 592 Globalization and World Politics
3 credits
How do the leaders of sovereign nation-states formulate their 
foreign policies and advance their nation’s interests in a world 
characterized by increasing globalization? How much policy-
162
making freedom to they have when faced with global constraints 
beyond their control? How do they respond to their domestic 
constituents while advancing multilateral efforts to address global 
issues? Does the nation-state still matter? Do policy choices reflect 
national identities? Does culture determine who one perceives as 
friends or enemies? Is there a difference in the behavior and policies 
of dictatorships compared to democracies? These are some of the 
questions that will be investigated in this course.
GMPA 593 Current Issues in Global Public Administration
3 credits
This course explores the global contours of economic, political, 
technological, security, cultural, migration, language, and 
environmental aspects of globalization. It will also look at the history 
of globalization by tracing the flows of commodities, people and 
ideas across geographic and ideological boundaries. An overarching 
theme will be the various ways in which globalization is supported 
by political and extra-political institutions and coordinated between 
different groups and cultures in a dynamic environment. In addition, 
the course will examine the often overlooked cultural dimensions 
of globalization, as well as its many counter-narratives of critique 
and discontent. Finally, we will consider the political backlash, at 
both the domestic and international levels, engendered by these 
globalizing processes and the future of the nation-state.
GMPA 594 Nonprofit Management and Leadership 
3 credits
Through extensive reading and site visits, you will explore the 
many challenges facing nonprofits and examine the functions and 
roles of nonprofit staffs and boards. You will also reflect on the 
similarities and differences between the business, government, 
and nonprofit sectors and the effective ways in which these three 
sectors collaborate.
GMPA 595 Resource Development for 
Nonprofit Organizations
3 Credits
The course will examine the concepts and practices of fundraising 
for nonprofit organizations. The study of fundraising will include a 
review of the major fundraising vehicles such as major gift, planned 
giving, corporate and foundation, and special events. Students will 
be introduced to the history of philanthropy in the United States as 
well as an understanding of how a culture of philanthropy is created. 
The course will explore the integration of fundraising within a 
nonprofit organizational structure as well as the leadership aspects 
necessary for an effective fundraising program.
600 SERIES COURSES
GMPA 630 The Public Policy Cycles 
3 credits
This course introduces students to the public policy process and 
its key institutions and actors (such as legislative bodies, chief 
executives, administrative agencies, courts, interest groups, 
advocacy coalitions, and the media). The course emphasizes key 
parameters of public policy formulation (agenda setting, policy 
formulation and design, implementation, evaluation) and theories 
of policy change. Students will be able to differentiate policy types 
and tools, effectively use evidence in shaping public policy, and will 
appreciate the importance of context (social, economic, political, 
and technological) in developing effective policies.
700 SERIES ELECTIVES
GMPA 798 Internship
3 credits
Prerequisite: Permission of the Director of Graduate Programs 
Students are placed in work roles that are related to their 
professional interests and supervised by both a faculty member 
and a field coordinator.
GMPA 799 Research in Public Administration
3 credits
Prerequisites: GMPA 540 Applied Statistics for Public and 
Nonprofit Administration or GOLL 806 Fundamentals of Applied 
Statistics This course discusses theory and limits of scientific 
inquiry, focusing on quantitative methods compared to qualitative 
methods of analysis, and research design and implementation. The 
class will encourage critical analysis of the research underlying 
policy recommendations and introduce students to a wide variety 
of social science research techniques and assists them in developing 
their own research projects.
GMPA 797 Public Administration Capstone Project 
3 credits
Prerequisite: This course can only be taken in the last semester of 
the student’s study in the MPA program.
The Capstone provides students with an opportunity to integrate 
learning from various courses with applied analysis of real-world 
issues. Students work individually under the guidance of a faculty 
member to develop a research design, carry out data collection 
and analysis, evaluate their findings, and provide conclusions 
and recommendations. The outputs are a project report and 
presentation to fellow students, faculty members, and invited 
guests. The capstone seminar serves as a culminating experience 
in the MPA program.
The course allows students to draw on material presented throughout 
the curriculum to develop and conduct an applied research 
project on a topic salient to public or nonprofit administration. 
This seminar will prepare students to use the skills they have 
developed throughout the program to analyze and solve key public 
management and policy problems. Students will complete practical 
analytic papers suitable for publication or public consumption 
as their key graded assignment. These papers demonstrate each 
student’s abilities and their collective body of skills and knowledge 
acquired throughout the MPA curriculum. The capstone project 
challenges students to clearly articulate a research question, identify 
best practices in the field through a literature review, and develop 
and execute a research protocol, in which the student:
163
Speech-Language Pathology
•	 Defines a research question that addresses an existing public or 
nonprofit problem.
•	 Identifies a theoretical model through which to approach the 
issue.
•	 Selects appropriate data collection methods.
•	 Collects data.
•	 Analyzes and interprets the data.
•	 Develops a written report and oral presentation of the findings 
and recommendations.
At the conclusion of the course, students will have demonstrated 
effective research skills, excellent oral and written communication 
skills, and will have displayed the level of knowledge necessary 
for effectively managing a public or non-profit organization as a 
competent leader.
A Sample Schedule for Full-Time On Ground MPA Student 
(Two Year Study Plan)
First Semester (Fall)
GMPA 510 	
	
Introduction to Public Administration 	
3
GMPA 530 	
	
Public Personnel Administration 	
3
GMPA 520 	
	
Administrative Ethics 	
3
Second Semester (Spring)
GMPA 540 	
	
Applied Statistics for Public  
and Nonprofit Administration 	
3
GMPA 532	
	
Public Budgeting Systems 	
3
GMPA 593 	
	
Current Issues in Global Public  
Administration 	
3
Third Semester (Fall)
GMPA 591 	
	
Global Comparative Public Administration 	 3
GMPA 592 	
	
Globalization and World Politics 	
3
GMPA 799 	
	
Research in Public Administration 	
3
Fourth Semester (Spring)
GMPA 533 	
	
Public Organizations and Management 	
3
GMPA 630 	
	
Public Policy Cycles 	
3
GMPA 797 	
	
Public Administration Capstone Project 	
3
Speech-Language 
Pathology
Master of Science in  
Speech-Language Pathology
Program Director: To be determined
INTRODUCTION
Speech-Language Pathologists are health professionals that prevent, 
assess, diagnose, and treat speech, language, social communication, 
cognitive-communication, and swallowing disorders in children 
and adults. The Master of Science degree in Speech-Language 
Pathology (SLP) at Gannon University is established as a 
postbaccalaureate program that involves a theoretical and practical 
professional curriculum consisting of advanced courses, research, 
and clinical experiences relevant to the discipline and required to 
earn the master’s degree. This curriculum was carefully aligned 
with the certification requirements for the American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) and the Pennsylvania 
Board of Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology licensure.
Students with an earned baccalaureate degree from an accredited 
institution who have completed all required courses, or their 
equivalents, with a C or higher and an overall GPA of 3.0 or 
higher, and the same minimal GPA in prerequisite courses prior 
to matriculation may be eligible for direct entry into the program. 
The Program Director will review all coursework to determine 
eligibility for direct admission to the professional curriculum during 
the admission process.
MISSION
The mission of the Master’s in Speech-Language Pathology 
Program at Gannon University is to foster the development of 
highly skilled, compassionate speech-language professionals who 
are dedicated to lifelong learning, leadership, and person-centered 
service. The program prepares graduates in providing holistic, 
evidence-based speech, language, and hearing healthcare and 
educational opportunities for an ever-evolving, culturally diverse 
society.
ACCREDITATION STATUS
The Master of Science degree program in Speech-Language 
Pathology at Gannon University is a Candidate for Accreditation 
by the Council on Academic Accreditation in Audiology and 
Speech-Language Pathology (CAA) of the American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association. This is a “pre-accreditation” status 
with the CAA, awarded to developing or emerging programs for a 
164
maximum period of five years. Students graduated from a program 
accredited by the Council on Academic Accreditation in Audiology 
and Speech-Language Pathology (CAA) or from a program with 
CAA-candidacy status, may submit their online application for 
ASHA certification any time after completing the necessary 
coursework and graduate clinical practicum, and after receiving 
confirmation from their program director that the requirements in 
Standards I–V have been met.” https://www.asha.org/certification/
SLPCertification.htm.
OUTCOMES
The outcomes of the Speech-Language Pathology program at 
Gannon University are to:
1.	 Advance the students’ knowledge and skills to diagnose, provide 
evidence-based treatment, and serve as an advocate in the scope 
of practice of speech-language pathology.
2.	 Apply knowledge of ethical standards and best practices in 
providing services for speech, language, and hearing disorders.
3.	 Effectively disseminate information in verbal and written form 
and commensurate with the target audience.
4.	 Identify and address the diverse and changing needs of the 
community with leadership and service.
5.	 Provide content and clinical experience to prepare students to 
qualify for and be successful in achieving national certification 
and state licensure, and participation in state and national 
professional organizations.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
The program is designed as a full-time course of study. Transfers to 
the program will be considered on a case-by-case basis. A maximum 
of 6 credits may be accepted for transfer, if a grade of B or higher 
was achieved, and approved by the program director.
Prior to matriculation in the program, students must complete and 
fulfill the following requirements:
•	 Baccalaureate degree from an accredited college or university*, 
with successful approval of required courses.
•	 Cumulative prerequisite course grade point average (GPA) of 3.0 
or better on a 4.0 scale; grades below a “C” are not acceptable.
•	 Overall undergraduate GPA of 3.0 or better (4.0 scale).
•	 Prerequisite courses, as shown below, must be completed within 
ten years preceding entrance into the graduate program.
•	 All prerequisite courses must be completed by June 1 in the year 
of enrollment.
•	 Personal interview. Spoken English skills, as well as ethical, 
personal and professional qualities to fulfill the role of a speech-
language pathologist will be assessed during the interview 
process.
•	 Three letters of recommendation, which address the applicant’s 
ethical, personal and professional qualities.
•	 Twenty-five (25) hours of observation of clinical practice by an 
ASHA-certified speech-language pathologist; observation hours 
should vary across settings, ages, and disorders.
•	 Personal Statement/Essay – Practice as a healthcare professional 
requires the ability to communicate in both verbal and written 
form. The Speech-Language Pathology Program expects 
admitted students to demonstrate graduate-level competence 
in verbal and written communication. Writing samples 
will be blinded and scored by SLP faculty as part of the 
admissions process.
Prerequisite Courses
Biological Sciences	
3 credits
	
(e.g. Human Anatomy and Physiology,  
Introduction to Biology)
Social/Behavioral Sciences	
6 credits 
	
(e.g. courses in Psychology,  
Sociology, Public Health)
Physical Sciences	3 credits
	
(e.g. college-level Chemistry or Physics)
Statistics	
	
	
3 credits
	
(e.g. college-level Statistics course  
that is computational and not remedial  
or historical in nature)
*	 Equivalent coursework includes a minimum of one course 
in each of the following six subjects:
Normal Speech and Language Development 
	
in Children		
	
3 credits
Anatomy and Physiology of Speech
	
and Hearing Mechanisms	
3 credits 
Phonetic	
	
	
3 credits
Speech and Hearing Sciences	
3 credits
Introduction to Audiology	
3 credits 
Communication Disorders in Children and Adults	
3 credits
APPLICATION PROCESS
Gannon University and the Speech-Language Pathology Program 
receives and reviews applications for the Master of Speech-
Language Pathology program and all applicant credentials 
exclusively through the Centralized Application Service for 
Communication Sciences and Disorders Programs (CSDCAS), 
provided by the Council of Academic Programs in Communication 
Sciences and Disorders (CAPCSD) and Liaison. Full application 
instructions can be found on the Gannon University – Erie, Pa 
profile page: https://csdcas. liaisoncas.com/applicant-ux/#/login
MASTER OF SCIENCE IN SPEECH-
LANGUAGE PATHOLOGY 
CURRICULUM
Fall – Year One
GSLP 602	
	
Clinical Methods Lab I: Pediatrics	
1
GSLP 605	
	
Speech Sound Disorders	
2
GSLP 607	
	
Speech Sound Disorders Lab	
1
165
Speech-Language Pathology
GSLP 608	
	
Language Disorders in Children	
2
GSLP 610	
	
Diagnostic Methods in  
Speech-Language Pathology	
3
GSLP 615	
	
Neuroscience for  
Speech-Language Pathology	
3
GSLP 618	
	
Clinic I	
1
Total		
	
	
13
Spring – Year One
GSLP 612	
	
School-Age Language Disorders	
2
GSLP 627	
	
Voice and Resonance Disorders	
2
GSLP 623	
	
Motor Speech Disorders	
2
GSLP 624	
	
Fluency Disorders	
2
GSLP 626	
	
Motor Speech Disorders Lab	
1
GSLP 628	
	
Clinic II	
1
GSLP 629	
	
Voice and Resonance Disorders Lab	
1
GSLP 630	
	
Principles of Research and  
Evidence-Based Practice	
2
Total		
	
	
13
Summer – Year One
GSLP 621	
	
Adult Cognitive-Communicative Disorders	
2
GSLP 622	
	
Adult Cognitive-Communicative  
Disorders Lab	
1
GSLP 625	
	
Clinical Methods Lab II: Adults	
1
GSLP 736	
	
Swallowing Disorders	
2
GSLP 737	
	
Swallowing Disorders Lab	
1
GSLP 638	
	
Clinic III	
2
Total		
	
	
9
Fall – Year Two
GSLP 733	
	
Aural Rehabilitation	
2
GSLP 739	
	
Hearing Disorders	
3
GSLP 748	
	
Clinic IV	
4
Total		
	
	
9
Spring – Year Two
GSLP 632	
	
Disorders in Special Populations	
2
GSLP 743	
	
Augmentative and Alternative  
Communication	
3
GSLP 758	
	
Clinic V	
4
GSLP 782	
	
Capstone I	
1
Total		
	
	
10
Summer – Year Two
GSLP 746	
	
Professional Issues	
3
GSLP 768	
	
Clinic VI	
4
GSLP 784	
	
Capstone II	
1
Total		
	
	
8
	
	 	 	
	
	
PROGRAM TOTAL CREDITS: 62
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GSLP 602 Clinical Methods Lab I: Pediatrics
1 credit
This course provides introductory knowledge and skills in 
clinical methods for diagnosis and treatment in communication 
and/or swallowing disorders in pediatric populations. General 
principles of clinical observation, assessment, and establishment 
of treatment goals, report writing, documentation, service delivery 
in various settings, and client admission and discharge criteria are 
emphasized. Topics on federal, state, and local laws, guidelines, 
and statutes in school settings, including FERPA, FAPE, IEPs, and 
RTI are presented. Goal writing in educational and other settings 
is highlighted including SMART goals and alternatives. Students 
will also become familiar with the University clinic and clinical 
handbook. Multicultural considerations in the intervention of 
children with communication and/or swallowing disorders will 
also be addressed.
GSLP 605 Speech Sound Disorders
2 credits
This course is designed to give students a basic foundation 
in the prevention, assessment, and treatment of speech sound 
disorders in children, emphasizing articulation and phonological 
delays. Students will initially learn foundation material such as 
the normal acquisition of speech production skills in childhood, 
and characteristics of the speech sounds of English. Specific 
approaches and techniques for the remediation of the disorders 
will be presented. Multicultural issues in the assessment and 
treatment of sound speech disorders will also be addressed, as well 
as counseling strategies.
GSLP 607 Speech Sound Disorders Lab
1 credit
This lab course aligns with the Speech Sound Disorders course 
(GSLP 605). The lab will encompass the test protocols, diagnosis, 
and application of evidence-based interventions for speech 
sound disorders.
GSLP 608 Language Disorders in Children
2 credits
This course introduces basic principles of prevention, assessment 
and intervention for children with language impairments at the 
prelinguistic, emerging and developing language phases. Language 
differences versus language disorders will be addressed as well 
as complex medical concerns, etiologies, co-morbidities, and 
counseling strategies. Multicultural issues in the assessment and 
treatment of language disorders will be addressed as well.
GSLP 610 Diagnostic Methods in Speech-Language 
Pathology
3 credits
This course is designed to provide students with a general 
understanding of the principles of diagnosis and evaluation of 
speech and language disorders. Students will gain experience in 
166
taking case histories, formulating an assessment battery, evaluating 
patients, writing the diagnostic reports and interpreting the data to 
parents and/ or involved disciplines. Students will be acquainted 
with fundamental principles and pitfalls to consider when making 
psychometric decisions in the assessment of speech and language 
skills. Multicultural issues will also be addressed, as well as 
counseling strategies.
GSLP 612 School-Age Language Disorders
2 credits
This course will provide instruction in language disorders in 
school-age children and adolescents. Topics include assessment, 
collaborative intervention, and social, cultural and linguistic 
implications for individuals with language disorders. Emphasis 
will be placed on the development of curriculum-based literacy 
skills and collaborative services delivery models.
GSLP 615 Neuroscience for Speech-Language Pathology
3 credits
This course is an intensive analysis and study of neuroanatomy 
and neurology for speech-language pathology. It will cover 
the neuroanatomy and neurological function of the central and 
peripheral nervous systems, embryology of the nervous system, 
completion of a neurological exam, taxonomy, and anatomy of 
the diencephalon, basal ganglia, and ventricles, and neurology of 
speech, language, hearing, and cognition.
GSLP 618 Clinic I
1 credit
The purpose of this course is for graduate clinicians in the Speech-
Language Pathology master’s program to gain knowledge about 
the evaluation and treatment of speech, language, and feeding/ 
swallowing disorders in children and/or adults. Assignments may 
include observations in community speech and hearing centers, 
schools, medical centers, and private practices. The graduate 
clinician will complete the observations under the direct supervision 
of the Speech-Language Pathologist(s) (SLPs) at the assigned 
site(s).
GSLP 627 Voice and Resonance Disorders
2 credits
This course provides advanced theory and techniques for the 
prevention, assessment, diagnosis, and remediation of voice and 
resonance disorders across the life span. Discussions of etiologies, 
instrumentation, counseling, and multicultural issues affecting 
appropriate intervention will be addressed.
GSLP 621 Adult Cognitive-Communicative Disorders
2 credits
The purpose of the course is to introduce communication disorders 
as a result of neurological injury or illness in the adult population. 
Content will emphasize etiology, characteristics, assessment and 
intervention associated with aphasia, traumatic brain injury, right 
hemisphere impairment, and dementia.
GSLP 622 Adult Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Lab
1 credit
This lab aligns with the Adult Cognitive-Communicative Disorders 
course (GSLP 621). The lab will involve the use of diagnostic tools 
and protocols, the application of evidence-based interventions, and 
management of adult cognitive-linguistic disorders.
GSLP 623 Motor Speech Disorders
2 credits
This course is designed to develop an understanding of the anatomy 
and physiology of speech production as it relates to motor speech 
disorders and the understanding of treatment and management 
of motor speech disorders. The course will involve the study 
of the etiology and characteristics of motor speech disorders 
in children and adults and will enhance the students’ skills for 
differential diagnosis and discussion of the professional and ethical 
issues involved in the assessment and interventions for motor 
speech disorders.
GSLP 624 Fluency Disorders
2 credits
This course introduces theories, evaluation procedures and 
therapeutic techniques in the treatment of fluency disorders. 
Terminology, classification, psychosocial impact, and nature of 
fluency disorders across the lifespan are discussed. Multicultural 
issues in the assessment and treatment of fluency disorders will 
also be addressed, as well as counseling strategies.
GSLP 625 Clinical Methods Lab II: Adults
1 credit
This course provides introductory knowledge and skills in clinical 
methods for diagnosis and treatment in communication and/or 
swallowing disorders in adult populations. General principles of 
clinical observation, assessment, the establishment of observable 
and measurable treatment goals, report writing, documentation, 
service delivery in various settings, and case management are 
emphasized.
GSLP 626 Motor Speech Disorders Lab
1 credit
This lab aligns with the Motor Speech Disorders course (GSLP 
623). The lab will involve critical-thinking skills as students will 
be introduced to the clinical applications to differentially diagnose 
neuro-motor speech disorders, learn to provide interventions, and 
understand the management of motor speech disorders in children 
and adults.
GSLP 628 Clinic II
1 credit
The purpose of this course is for graduate clinicians in the Speech-
Language Pathology master’s program to initiate their clinical 
experience in the evaluation and treatment of speech, language, 
and feeding/swallowing disorders in children and/or adults. 
Assignments may include individual and/or group sessions with 
167
Speech-Language Pathology
children and/ or adults with different disorders at the Gannon 
University Ruskin Clinic. The graduate clinician will complete the 
placement under the direct supervision of the Speech-Language 
Pathologist(s) (SLPs) at the assigned site(s).
GSLP 629 Voice and Resonance Disorders Lab
1 credit
This lab course aligns with the Voice and Resonance Disorders 
course (GSLP 627). The lab will encompass the assessment 
protocols, instrumentation, diagnosis, and application of evidence-
based interventions for voice and resonance disorders. Proficiency 
with instrumentation for options within assessment and treatment 
is required.
GSLP 630 Principles of Research and  
Evidence-Based Practice
2 credits
This course is the foundation for the research thread throughout 
the curriculum and will prepare the student for the synthesis and 
application of research within the scope of practice of speech-
language pathology. This course will cover the topics of the 
scientific method, types of research, idea generation and innovation, 
identifying and locating relevant resources, how to read scientific 
literature, research ethics, statistics, formatting references, and 
literature review.
GSLP 632 Disorders in Special Populations
2 credits
This course is designed for students to gain knowledge of the 
specialized communication needs of patients of all ages with 
medical, neurological, anatomical, and cognitive disorders. This 
course will focus on individuals with autism spectrum disorders, 
craniofacial anomalies, genetic disorders and syndromes, and 
hearing disorders (e.g., central auditory processing). This course 
will provide students with strategies for providing effective 
advocacy and education for the prevention, diagnosis, and 
intervention for individuals within these populations. This course 
will also explore the role of an interdisciplinary team when serving 
individuals in these special populations.
GSLP 638 Clinic III
2 credits
The purpose of this course is for graduate clinicians in the Speech-
Language Pathology master’s program to continue gaining 
experience in the evaluation and treatment of speech, language, 
and feeding/swallowing disorders in children and/or adults. 
Assignments may include individual and/or group sessions with 
children and/ or adults with different disorders at the Gannon 
University Ruskin Clinic. The graduate clinician will complete the 
placement under the direct supervision of the Speech-Language 
Pathologist(s) (SLPs) at the assigned site(s).
GSLP 733 Aural Rehabilitation
2 credits
This course introduces students to the theories and procedures used 
to provide aural/audiological rehabilitation to children and adults 
who have hearing loss and to provide concomitant services to their 
family members. Students will learn about (1) the scope of practice 
for speech-language pathologists and audiologists who provide 
aural rehabilitation services; (2) the assessment and prosthetic 
management of children and adults who have hearing loss; (3) the 
effects of hearing loss on conversational fluency and everyday 
speech communication; and (4) the means for developing aural 
rehabilitation plans and for assessing their effectiveness.
GSLP 736 Swallowing Disorders
2 credits
The course lectures, readings, and materials will cover normal 
and abnormal anatomy and physiology related to swallowing 
function, etiology, signs, and symptoms of dysphagia, techniques, 
and instrumentation for diagnosis and management of dysphagia, 
procedures for analysis and integration of diagnostic information, 
and basic management issues such as special clinical populations, 
quality of life issues, and evidence-based practice.
GSLP 737 Swallowing Disorders Lab
1 credit
This lab aligns with the Swallowing Disorders course (GSLP 736). 
The lab will provide students with an overview of the diagnostic 
protocols, medical assessments, bedside evaluations, radiological 
evaluations, and evidence-based interventions for adult and child 
populations with swallowing disorders.
GSLP 739 Hearing Disorders
3 credits
This course covers the nature and causes of hearing disorders, 
including outer and middle ear, cochlear, retrocochlear, and central 
nervous system. It is designed to acquaint students with topics 
regarding the anatomy and physiology of normal and abnormal 
hearing, basic concepts in pure-tone air and bone conduction 
audiometry, speech audiometry, interpretation of audiograms, 
immittance procedures, and basic management of the hearing 
loss of the hearing-impaired client. Counseling and multicultural 
considerations affecting appropriate intervention are also addressed.
GSLP 743 Augmentative and Alternative Communication
3 credits
This course is designed to expose students to augmentative and 
alternative forms of communication used to support or treat 
patients with communication disorders. Students will learn about 
terminology and application of AAC, augmentative communication 
system components, the evaluation process for an appropriate 
selection of an assistive device, and intervention strategies for 
individuals with limited or nonfunctional speech. The types 
of communication covered in this course include messages, 
symbols, rate enhancement, low-tech devices, high-tech devices, 
168
programming devices, training users and communication partners, 
toting and mounting communication devices, and report writing.
GSLP 746 Professional Issues
3 credits
This course is designed to build the student’s professional 
competency, preparation for certification/licensure, and future 
employment. Topics covered within the course include professional 
ethics, certification/licensure requirements, accreditation process, 
clinical fellowship, continuing education, telepractice, billing and 
coding, advocacy, marketing, private practice, doctoral education, 
scope of practice, and best practices to seek employment.
GSLP 748 Clinic IV
4 credits
The purpose of this course is for graduate clinicians in the Speech-
Language Pathology master’s program to gain intermediate to 
advanced clinical experience in the evaluation and treatment of 
speech, language, and feeding/swallowing disorders in children 
and/or adults. The graduate clinician will complete an on-campus 
or off-campus practicum experience (“placement”) in an assigned, 
affiliated facility. Assignments may include community speech and 
hearing centers, schools, medical centers, private practices, and 
Gannon University Clinic. The graduate clinician will complete 
the placement under the direct supervision of the Speech-Language 
Pathologist(s) (SLPs) at the assigned site(s).
GSLP 758 Clinic V
4 credits
The purpose of this course is for graduate clinicians in the Speech-
Language Pathology master’s program to gain advanced clinical 
experience in the evaluation and treatment of speech, language, 
and feeding/swallowing disorders in children and/or adults. The 
graduate clinician will complete an on-campus or off-campus 
practicum experience (“placement”) in an assigned, affiliated 
facility. Assignments may include community speech and hearing 
centers, schools, medical centers, private practices, and Gannon 
University Clinic. The graduate clinician will complete the 
placement under the direct supervision of the Speech-Language 
Pathologist(s) (SLPs) at the assigned site(s).
GSLP 768 Clinic VI
4 credits
The purpose of this course is for graduate clinicians in the Speech-
Language Pathology master’s program to continue to gain advanced 
clinical experience in the evaluation and treatment of speech, 
language, and feeding/swallowing disorders in children and/or 
adults. The graduate clinician will complete an on-campus or 
off-campus practicum experience (“placement”) in an assigned, 
affiliated facility. Assignments may include community speech and 
hearing centers, schools, medical centers, private practices, and 
Gannon University Clinic. The graduate clinician will complete 
the placement under the direct supervision of the Speech-Language 
Pathologist(s) (SLPs) at the assigned site(s).
GSLP 782 Capstone I
1 credit
This course is designed to serve as the first part of a culminating 
experience within the curriculum. The students will review 
and integrate program content in preparation for the national 
comprehensive examination required for certification as a speech-
language pathologist. Students will familiarize themselves with 
exam content, structure, questions, and test-taking strategies. The 
course aims to support the synthesis of information from across the 
program to enhance student understanding and to help contribute 
to future success in the field.
GSLP 784 Capstone II
1 credit
This course is designed to serve as the second and final culminating 
experience within the curriculum. Students will integrate their 
didactic, clinical, research, and other experiential learning into 
a final e-portfolio and presentation. This course will help launch 
students into their professional careers as they demonstrate evidence 
of competence to warrant the awarding of a degree in the field of 
communication sciences and disorders.
169
Speech-Language Pathology
Speech-Language 
Pathology
Pre-Speech Language 
Pathology Path to Master of 
Science in Speech-Language 
Pathology (includes online 
foundational coursework)
Program Director: To be determined
INTRODUCTION
Speech Language Pathologists are medical professionals that 
prevent, assess, diagnose, and treat speech, language, social 
communication, cognitive communication, and swallowing 
disorders in children and adults. The Master of Science degree 
in Speech Language Pathology (SLP) at Gannon University 
is established as a postbaccalaureate program that involves a 
theoretical and practical professional curriculum consisting of 
advanced courses, research, and clinical experiences relevant to the 
discipline and required to earn the master’s degree. This curriculum 
was carefully aligned with the certification requirements for the 
American Speech-Language and Hearing Association (ASHA) and 
the Florida Board of Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology 
licensure.
Students with an earned baccalaureate degree in communication 
sciences and disorders who have completed all courses, or their 
equivalents with a C or higher and a GPA of 3.0 or higher in these 
courses prior to matriculation may be eligible for direct entry into 
the professional phase of the program. The Program Director will 
review all coursework to determine eligibility for direct admission 
to the professional curriculum during the admission process.
MISSION
The mission of the Master’s in Speech-Language Pathology 
Program at Gannon University is to foster the development of 
highly skilled, compassionate speech-language professionals who 
are dedicated to lifelong learning, leadership, and person-centered 
service. The program prepares graduates in providing holistic, 
evidence-based speech, language and hearing healthcare and 
educational opportunities for an ever evolving, culturally diverse 
society.
ACCREDITATION STATUS
The Master of Science degree program in Speech-Language 
Pathology at Gannon University is a Candidate for Accreditation 
by the Council on Academic Accreditation in Audiology and 
Speech-Language Pathology (CAA) of the American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association. This is a “pre-accreditation” status 
with the CAA, awarded to developing or emerging programs for a 
maximum period of five years. Students graduated from a program 
accredited by the Council on Academic Accreditation in Audiology 
and Speech-Language Pathology (CAA) or from a program with 
CAA-candidacy status, may submit their online application for 
ASHA certification any time after completing the necessary 
coursework and graduate clinical practicum, and after receiving 
confirmation from their program director that the requirements in 
Standards I–V have been met.” https://www.asha.org/certification/
SLPCertification.htm.
OUTCOMES
The outcomes of the Speech-Language Pathology program at 
Gannon University are to:
1.	 Advance the students’ knowledge and skills to diagnose, provide 
evidence-based treatment, and serve as an advocate in the scope 
of practice of speech-language pathology.
2.	 Apply knowledge of ethical standards and best practice in 
providing services for speech, language, and hearing disorders.
3.	 Effectively disseminate information in verbal and written form 
and commensurate with the target audience.
4.	 Identify and address the diverse and changing needs of the 
community with leadership and service.
The program will provide:
5.	 Content and clinical experience to prepare students to qualify 
for and be successful in achieving national certification and state 
licensure, and participation in state and national professional 
organizations.
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS 
Pre-Speech Language Pathology Path
The foundational coursework is offered online and able to be com-
pleted on a part-time basis within a one-year timeframe. 
Prior to matriculation in the foundational coursework, students 
must complete and fulfill the following requirements:
•	 Baccalaureate degree from an accredited college or university 
or conditional acceptance via articulation agreement.
•	 Cumulative prerequisite course grade point average (GPA) of 3.0 
or better on a 4.0 scale; grades below a “C” are not acceptable.
•	 Overall undergraduate GPA of 3.0 or better (4.0 scale)
•	 Prerequisite courses, as shown below, must be completed within 
ten years preceding entrance into the graduate program.
•	 All prerequisite courses must be completed by June 1 in the year 
of enrollment.
170
Prerequisite Courses
Biological Sciences	
3 credits
(e.g., Human Anatomy and Physiology,  
Introduction to Biology)
Social/Behavioral Sciences	
6 credits 
(e.g., courses in Psychology, Sociology, Public Health)
Physical Sciences	
3 credits
(e.g., college-level Chemistry or Physics)
Statistics	
	
3 credits
(e.g., college-level Statistics course that is  
computational and not remedial or historical in nature)
APPLICATION PROCESS
The Office of Graduate Admissions and the Speech-Language 
Pathology Program receives and reviews applications for the 
Pre-Speech Language Pathology Path to the Master of Speech-
Language Pathology program on a monthly basis. The electronic 
application can be located at www.apply.gannon.edu. 
PROGRESSION TO MASTER OF 
SCIENCE IN SPEECH-LANGUAGE 
PATHOLOGY PROGRAM
Successful completion of all foundational courses (18 credits) at 3.0 
GPA or above, in addition to meeting the admission requirements 
outlined below, guarantees progression to the professional program.
•	 Personal interview. Spoken English skills, as well as ethical, 
personal and professional qualities to fulfill the role of a speech-
language pathologist will be assessed during the interview 
process.
•	 Three letters of recommendation, which address the applicant’s 
ethical, personal and professional qualities.
•	 Twenty-five (25) hours of observation of clinical practice by an 
ASHA-certified speech-language pathologist; observation hours 
should vary across settings, ages, and disorders. These hours are 
observation hours prior to admission; they are part of the 400 
hours required by ASHA for Certificate of Clinical Competence, 
which should be completed as part of our academic program.
•	 Personal Statement/Essay – Practice as a healthcare professional 
requires the ability to communicate in both verbal and written 
form. The Speech-Language Pathology Program expects 
admitted students to demonstrate graduate level competence 
in verbal and written communication. A writing sample, to be 
done on-site, will be required of each applicant to assess his/ 
her graduate level competence for written English. Writing 
samples will be blinded and scored by SLP faculty as part of 
the admissions process.
The professional program is designed as a full-time course of study. 
Transfers to the program will be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
A maximum of 6 credits may be accepted for transfer, if a grade of 
B or higher was achieved, and approved by the program director.
MASTER OF SCIENCE IN SPEECH-
LANGUAGE PATHOLOGY 
CURRICULUM
Introductory Coursework
GSLP 502	
Anatomy and Physiology of Communication	
3
GSLP 505	
Phonetics	
3
GSLP 508	
Normal Speech and Language Development	
3
GSLP 512	
Speech and Hearing Science	
3
GSLP 515	
Introduction to Audiology	
3
GSLP 518	
Communication Disorders  
in Children and Adults	
3
Total		
	
	
18
Fall – Year One
GSLP 602	
Clinical Methods Lab I: Pediatrics	
1
GSLP 605	
Speech Sound Disorders	
2
GSLP 607	
Speech Sound Disorders Lab	
1
GSLP 608	
Language Disorders in Children	
2
GSLP 610	
Diagnostic Methods in  
Speech-Language Pathology	
3
GSLP 615	
Neuroscience for Speech-Language Pathology	 3
GSLP 618	
Clinic I	
1
Total		
	
	
13
Spring – Year One
GSLP 612	
School-Age Language Disorders	
2
GSLP 627	
Voice and Resonance Disorders	
2
GSLP 623	
Motor Speech Disorders	
2
GSLP 624	
Fluency Disorders	
2
GSLP 626	
Motor Speech Disorders Lab	
1
GSLP 628	
Clinic II	
1
GSLP 629	
Voice and Resonance Disorders Lab	
1
GSLP 630	
Principles of Research and  
Evidence-Based Practice	
2
Total		
	
	
13
Summer – Year One
GSLP 621	
Adult Cognitive-Communicative Disorders	
2
GSLP 622	
Adult Cognitive-Communicative  
Disorders Lab	
1
GSLP 625	
Clinical Methods Lab II: Adults	
1
GSLP 736	
Swallowing Disorders	
2
GSLP 737	
Swallowing Disorders Lab	
1
GSLP 638	
Clinic III	
2
Total		
	
	
9
Fall – Year Two
GSLP 733	
Aural Rehabilitation	
2
GSLP 739	
Hearing Disorders	
3
GSLP 748	
Clinic IV	
4
Total		
	
	
9
171
Speech-Language Pathology
Spring – Year Two
GSLP 632	
Disorders in Special Populations	
2
GSLP 743	
Augmentative and Alternative Communication	 3
GSLP 758	
Clinic V	
4
GSLP 782	
Capstone I	
1
Total		
	
	
10
Summer – Year Two
GSLP 746	
Professional Issues	
3
GSLP 768	
Clinic VI	
4
GSLP 784	
Capstone II	
1
Total		
	
	
8
	
	 	 	
	
	
PROGRAM TOTAL CREDITS: 80
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GSLP 502 Anatomy and Physiology of Communication
3 credits
The purpose of this course is to familiarize students with the 
anatomy (structures) and physiology (processes) associated with 
speech, language, hearing, chewing, and swallowing. Topics cov-
ered include terminology, taxonomy, embryology, quiet and speech 
breathing, phonation, skull anatomy and dentition, mastication and 
deglutition, facial, oral, and velopharyngeal anatomy and physiol-
ogy, neurons, brain, and spinal cord.
GSLP 505 Phonetics
3 credits
In this course, students learn the International Phonetic Alphabet, 
dialectical differences, place, manner, and voicing for speech 
production in American English, speech rates across the lifespan, 
and listening and classifying normal speakers.
GSLP 508 Normal Speech and Language Development
3 credits
This course will introduce students to the fundamentals of language 
acquisition theories, building blocks of language, brain and 
language, genetic and environmental factors that impact speech 
and speech development, developmental timelines for receptive 
and expressive communication, and phonological awareness 
and literacy.
GSLP 512 Speech and Hearing Science
3 credits
Basic science principles such as the evolution of speech production, 
acoustics of vowels and consonants, hearing science, speech 
perception, synthetic speech, neuroscience of communication, and 
speech analysis are covered in this course.
GSLP 515 Introduction to Audiology
3 credits
In this course, students are introduced to the scope of practice, 
anatomy and physiology of peripheral and central auditory system, 
hearing science, air and bone conduction, audiometers and test 
environments, pure tone and speech audiometry, inter-aural 
attenuation and masking, auditory disorders, acoustic immittance, 
occupational hearing conservation, and impact of hearing loss on 
learning and quality of life.
GSLP 518 Communication Disorders in Children and Adults
3 credits
Students will learn genetics, etiologies and prevalence of 
communication and swallowing disorders, impact and consequences 
of untreated disorders, and treatment approaches in this course.
GSLP 521 Counseling Individuals and Families  
with Communication Disorders
3 credits
This course includes a didactic review of human responses to 
loss and counseling techniques. Unique challenges to various 
communication disorders are covered to provide students with 
underlying content needed to prepare for counseling behaviors in 
practice.
GSLP 602 Clinical Methods Lab I: Pediatrics
1 credit
This course provides the introductory knowledge and skills in 
clinical methods for diagnosis and treatment in communication 
and/or swallowing disorders in pediatric populations. General 
principles of clinical observation, assessment, and establishment 
of treatment goals, report writing, documentation, service delivery 
in various settings, and client admission and discharge criteria are 
emphasized. Topics on federal, state, and local laws, guidelines 
and statutes in school settings, including FERPA, FAPE, IEPs, 
and RTI are presented. Goal writing in educational and other 
settings is highlighted including SMART goals and alternatives. 
Students will also become familiar with the university clinic and 
clinical handbook. Multicultural considerations in intervention of 
children with communication and/or swallowing disorders will 
also be addressed.
GSLP 605 Speech Sound Disorders
2 credits
This course is designed to give students a basic foundation in the 
prevention, assessment and treatment of speech sound disorders in 
children, emphasizing articulation and phonological delays. Students 
will initially learn foundation material such as normal acquisition 
of speech production skills in childhood, and characteristics of the 
speech sounds of English. Specific approaches and techniques for 
the remediation of the disorders will be presented. Multicultural 
issues in the assessment and treatment of sound speech disorders 
will also be addressed, as well as counseling strategies.
172
GSLP 607 Speech Sound Disorders Lab
1 credit
This lab course aligns with the Speech Sound Disorders course 
(GSLP 605). The lab will encompass the test protocols, diagnosis, 
and application of evidenced-based interventions for speech sound 
disorders.
GSLP 608 Language Disorders in Children
2 credits
This course introduces basic principles of prevention, assessment 
and intervention for children with language impairments at the 
prelinguistic, emerging and developing language phases. Language 
differences versus language disorders will be addressed as well 
as complex medical concerns, etiologies, co-morbidities, and 
counseling strategies. Multicultural issues in the assessment and 
treatment of language disorders will be addressed as well.
GSLP 610 Diagnostic Methods in  
Speech-Language Pathology
3 credits
This course is designed to provide students with a general 
understanding of the principles of diagnosis and evaluation of 
speech and language disorders. Students will gain experience in 
taking case histories, formulating an assessment battery, evaluating 
patients, writing the diagnostic reports and interpreting the data to 
parents and/ or involved disciplines. Students will be acquainted 
with fundamental principles and pitfalls to consider when making 
psychometric decisions in the assessment of speech and language 
skills. Multicultural issues will also be addressed, as well as 
counseling strategies.
GSLP 612 School-Age Language Disorders
2 credits
This course will provide instruction in language disorders in 
school-age children and adolescents. Topics include assessment, 
collaborative intervention, and social, cultural and linguistic 
implications for individuals with language disorders. Emphasis 
will be placed on the development of curriculum-based literacy 
skills and collaborative services delivery models.
GSLP 615 Neuroscience for Speech Language Pathology
3 credits
This course is an intensive analysis and study of neuroanatomy 
and neurology for speech language pathology. It will cover the 
anatomy and neurological function of the central and peripheral 
nervous systems, embryology of the nervous system, completion 
of a neurological exam, taxonomy, anatomy of the diencephalon, 
basal ganglia, and ventricles, and neurology of speech, language, 
hearing, and cognition.
GSLP 618 Clinic I
1 credit
This course provides students with their first clinical experiences 
with children and adults with communication and/or swallowing 
disorders. Program faculty at the University clinic or external 
clinical sites will supervise the clinical experience.
GSLP 620 Voice and Resonance Disorders
2 credits
This course provides advanced theory and techniques for the 
prevention, assessment, diagnosis and remediation of voice and 
resonance disorders across the life span. Discussions of etiologies, 
instrumentation, counseling and multicultural issues affecting 
appropriate intervention will be addressed.
GSLP 621 Adult Cognitive-Communicative Disorders 
GSLP 622 Adult Cognitive-Communicative Disorders Lab 
2 credits/1 credit
In this course, students learn about the evaluation and management 
of adult cognitive-communication disorders including concussion, 
TBI, CVA, aphasia, Parkinson’s disease, and dementia. The lab will 
involve the use of diagnostic tools and protocols, application of 
evidence-based interventions, and management of adult cognitive-
linguistic disorders.
GSLP 623 Motor Speech Disorders 
GSLP 626 Motor Speech Disorders Lab 
2 credits/1 credit
This course is designed to provide a comprehensive overview 
of acquired and developmental motor speech disorders in child 
and adult populations. The students will learn to differentiate 
the characteristics of disorders such as apraxia and dysarthria 
of speech from cognitive-linguistic, neurological non-organic 
disorders such as apraxia. The lab will involve critical thinking 
skills as students will be introduced to the clinical applications 
to differentially diagnose neuro-motor speech disorders, learn to 
provide interventions, and understand the management of motor 
speech disorders in children and adults.
GSLP 624 Fluency Disorders
2 credits
This course introduces theories, evaluation procedures and 
therapeutic techniques in the treatment of fluency disorders. 
Terminology, classification, psychosocial impact, and nature of 
fluency disorders across the lifespan are discussed. Multicultural 
issues in the assessment and treatment of fluency disorders will 
also be addressed, as well as counseling strategies.
GSLP 625 Clinical Methods Lab II: Adults
1 credit
This course is designed to advance the student’s clinical skills for 
greater independence taking patient history, selection of diagnostic 
tools, critical thinking for differential diagnosis of speech disorders 
in adults, writing comprehensive evaluations, and presenting case 
173
Speech-Language Pathology
studies to peers to enhance verbal skills for all settings served by 
speech language pathologists.
GSLP 629 Voice and Resonance Disorders Lab
1 credit
This lab course aligns with the Voice and Resonance Disorders 
course (GSLP 620). The lab will encompass the assessment 
protocols, instrumentation, diagnosis, and application of evidence-
based interventions for voice and resonance disorders. Proficiency 
with instrumentation for options within assessment and treatment 
is required.
GSLP 628 Clinic II
1 credit
This course is the second in a series of clinical experiences with 
children and adults with communication disorders. Students will 
apply theoretical concepts to assess, diagnose, and offer evidence-
based treatment to individuals with speech, language, swallowing 
and hearing disorders. Individual speech-language assessment 
and therapy sessions will be arranged by an ASHA certified 
clinical instructor.
GSLP 630 Principles of Research  
and Evidence Based Practice
2 credits
This course is the foundation for the research thread throughout 
the curriculum and will prepare the student for the synthesis and 
application of research within the scope of practice of speech 
language pathology. This course will cover the topics of the 
scientific method, types of research, idea generation and innovation, 
identifying and locating relevant resources, how to read scientific 
literature, research ethics, statistics, formatting references, and 
literature review.
GSLP 632 Disorders in Special Populations
2 credits
This course is designed for graduate level clinicians to gain 
knowledge in the medical, neurological, anatomical, and cognitive 
disorders of patients with specialized communication needs 
including patients with craniofacial anomalies, genetic syndromes, 
autism, central auditory processing, and current issues facing speech 
language pathologists.
GSLP 638 Clinic III
2 credits
This course is the third in a series of early clinical experiences with 
children and adults with communication disorders. The clinical 
experience will be supervised by program faculty in the University 
clinic or local clinical sites. Students will begin the application of 
knowledge under the supervision of faculty with the administration 
of diagnostic evaluations, planning therapy interventions, applying 
evidence-based interventions, and documentation of assessments 
and interventions.
GSLP 733 Aural Rehabilitation
2 credits
This course covers the topics related to aural rehabilitation including 
the impact of childhood hearing loss on families, family counseling, 
hearing aids and ear molds, cochlear implants, classroom acoustics, 
assistive listening devices, communication options, education 
of children with hearing loss, developing listening, literacy, 
and speaking skills, adults with hearing loss, speechreading, 
communication strategies training, and co-morbidities.
GSLP 736 Swallowing Disorders 
GGSLP 737 Swallowing Disorders Lab 
2 credits/1 credit
This course builds on prior courses with a focus on swallowing 
disorders. The course begins with examination of the upper 
aero-digestive tract developmental anatomy and physiology 
and neurogenic and structural dysphagia, and continues on to 
instrumental and bedside evaluation, treatment strategies, ethical 
issues, and classification of swallowing disorders. The lab will 
provide students with an overview of the diagnostic protocols, 
medical assessments, bedside evaluations, radiological evaluations, 
and evidence-based interventions for adult and child populations 
with swallowing disorders.
GSLP 739 Hearing Disorders
3 credits
This course is designed to focus on hearing disorders and will cover 
the topics of incidence and impact of conductive and sensorineural 
hearing loss, screening hearing impairment and disability, screening 
middle ears, comprehensive aural rehabilitation, screening and 
treating auditory processing disorder, interpreting audiograms, 
genetic and non-genetic etiologies, counseling and healthy coping 
strategies, and classroom acoustics/amplification.
GSLP 743 Augmentative and Alternative Communication
3 credits
This course is designed to expose students to augmentative and 
alternative forms of communication used to support or treat patients 
with communication disorders. The types of communication 
covered in this course include messages, symbols, rate enhancement, 
low-tech devices, high-tech devices, programming devices, 
training users and communication partners, toting and mounting 
communication devices, and report writing.
GSLP 746 Professional Issues
3 credits
This course is designed to build the student’s professional 
competency, preparation for certification and future employment. 
Topics covered within the course include professional ethics, 
certification/licensure requirements, accreditation process, clinical 
fellowship, continuing education, telepractice, billing and coding, 
advocacy, marketing, private practice, doctoral education, scope 
of practice, and best practices to seek employment.
174
GSLP 748 Clinic IV
4 credits
This course is the fourth in a series of clinical experiences with 
children and adults with communication and/or swallowing 
disorders. This course is a more intensive and progressive 
experience supervised by clinical educators at the University clinic 
or off site. Students will manage a small client caseload from 
evaluation to therapy interventions demonstrating proper clinic 
protocol and maintenance of records.
GSLP 758 Clinic V
4 credits
This course is the fifth in a series of clinical experiences with 
children and adults with communication and/or swallowing 
disorders. This is more intensive and progressive experience 
supervised by clinical educators at the University clinic or off 
site. Students will manage a small client caseload from evaluation 
to therapy interventions demonstrating proper clinic protocol and 
maintenance of records.
GSLP 768 Clinic VI
4 credits
The final clinical experience with children and adults with com-
munication and/or swallowing disorders. This experience is a 
more intensive and progressive experience supervised by clinical 
educators off site. This externship placement will give the student 
practitioner greater independence administering diagnostic assess-
ments, providing direct therapy, maintaining all documentation, and 
fulfilling the duties of the SLP in the off-site setting.
GSLP 782 Capstone I
1 credit
This course is designed to serve as the first part of a culminating 
experience within the curriculum. The students will review and 
integrate program content in preparation for the national compre-
hensive examination required for certification as a speech-language 
pathologist. Students will familiarize themselves with exam con-
tent, structure, questions, and test-taking strategies. The course aims 
to support the synthesis of information from across the program 
to enhance student understanding and to help contribute to future 
success in the field. 
GSLP 784 Capstone II
1 credit
This course is designed to serve as the second and final culminat-
ing experience within the curriculum. Students will integrate their 
didactic, clinical, research, and other experiential learning into a 
final e-portfolio and presentation. This course will help launch stu-
dents into their professional careers as they demonstrate evidence 
of competence to warrant the awarding of a degree in the field of 
communication sciences and disorders.
Strategic 
Communication
Program Director: Jennifer R. Allen Catellier, Ph.D.
INTRODUCTION
The Master of Arts in Strategic Communication prepares students 
for careers in various areas of communication including public 
relations, corporate communication, and health communication. 
The curriculum combines a theoretical foundation with a focus 
on the essential skills for communication professionals. Accord-
ing to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, employment in media and 
communication is expected to grow faster than average with about 
151,500 new jobs by 2030. These jobs arise from the need to cre-
ate, edit, translate, and disseminate information across a variety 
of platforms.* 
This STEM-designated program focuses on the increasing use of 
technology in the field of communication while also providing a 
foundation for media and communication analytics.
* Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational 
Outlook Handbook, Media and Communication Occupations.
https://www.bls.gov/ooh/media-and-communication/home.htm
WHAT YOU WILL LEARN
At the completion of this 30-credit program students will be able to:
1. 	Understand the cultural and political issues impacting the study 
of mediated communication in various contexts. 
2. 	Apply communication theory and communication ethics in 
interpersonal, small group, team, and organizational contexts. 
3. 	Analyze the role that media law and ethical persuasion play 
within the marketplace. 
4. 	Evaluate existing research in order to examine a contemporary 
issue within the field of communication. 
5. 	Critique existing professional practices and academic research 
to improve interaction between persons of varying religious, 
professional, and socio-economic backgrounds. 
ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS
Applicants interested in the Master of Arts in Strategic Commu-
nication must hold a bachelor’s degree from an accredited college 
or university. The undergraduate degree does not have to be in a 
communication-related field, but applicants are required to demon-
strate a basic understanding and awareness of communication. 
175
Strategic Communication
To apply:
•	 Submit a graduate application
•	 Submit final, official, transcripts from all colleges and/or 
universities attended
•	 Submit three professional letters of recommendation
•	 A statement of the applicant’s professional and career goals (not 
more than 500 words).
•	 All application materials must be submitted to the Graduate 
Admissions Office no later than August 1 (for Fall admission), 
November 1 (for Spring admission), or May 1 (for Summer 
Admission).
The graduate assistantship deadline is April 15 for 
assistantships beginning in fall semester. 
ASSISTANTSHIPS
Graduate Assistantships are available for full-time students. 
Potential responsibilities of Graduate Assistants are:
•	 Serving as teaching or research assistants with experienced 
faculty members
•	 Teaching SPCH 111:Public Speaking or other available courses
•	 Assisting with various programmatic duties
CURRICULUM
Graduate Program Core Courses (15 credits) 
GCOMM 505		
Strategic Communication Research Methods
GCOMM 525		
Organizational Communication and Analysis
GCOMM 590		
Strategic Communication Ethics and Law
GCOMM 610		
Message Design and Media Production
GCOMM 620		
Social Media Management
Choose one emphasis:
Communication Management Emphasis (Take 9 credits)
GCOMM 520		
Public Relations Management
GCOMM 535		
Persuasion in the Marketplace
GCOMM 550		
Crisis and Risk Communication
GCOMM 615		
Intercultural Communication
Health Communication Emphasis (Take 9 credits)
GCOMM 515		
Health Communication
GCOMM 545		
Patient-Provider Communication
GCOMM 550		
Crisis and Risk Communication
GCOMM 605		
Family Communication
GCOMM 615		
Intercultural Communication
Capstone Courses (6 credits)
GCOMM 625		
Communication Campaigns and 
GCOMM 635		
Communication Seminar or
GCOMM 640		
Communication Internship
4+1 MA Strategic Communication Degree Program 
The4+1 MA degree program is designed to allow outstanding 
undergraduate students the opportunity to earn both an undergraduate 
degree in many disciplines and a Master’s Degree in Strategic 
Communication within a five year period. Students from any major 
may apply and should do so in their junior year. Working with 
both the undergraduate advisor and the Strategic Communication 
Program Director, the student will customize a schedule in which 
they will take 6 credits of graduate courses during their senior year. 
Students who successfully complete these courses will continue into 
the MA in Strategic Communication to complete the remaining 24 
credits. Applicants to the program must have a 3.0 undergraduate 
GPA. Retention in the program requires that the student maintain 
a minimum of a 3.0 GPA for their undergraduate studies.
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
GCOMM 505 Strategic Communication Research Methods
3 credits
Students learn to interpret and design various theoretical studies 
within the field of communication, highlighting multiple theoretical 
perspectives that inform communication scholarship. Students 
will learn quantitative methods for communication research and 
data analysis.
GCOMM 515 Health Communication 
3 credits
A foundational course introducing students to communication 
theory and research in a variety of health communication contexts, 
including interpersonal, organizational, intercultural, family, and 
public communication.
GCOMM 520 Public Relations Management
3 credits
This course examines the application of strategic management 
principles to the development of public relations programs. A 
particular emphasis is placed on public relations as a management 
function internally and externally between an organization and 
its stakeholders. Students will examine key principles in areas of 
public relations including media relations, employee relations, 
communication relations, government relations, consumer 
relations, and issues management.
GCOMM 525 Organizational Communication and Analysis
3 credits 
This course examines communication theory as it is applied in var-
ious organizational settings. Topics include organizational assim-
ilation, decision-making, leadership, structure, and environment. 
The various audiences to which organizational communicators 
direct a message will also be examined. Analysis of organizational 
communication and structures is discussed. 
176
GCOMM 535 Persuasion in the Marketplace 
3 credits 
Examines the design, form, and strategies of persuasion in the 
marketplace. Also considers the construction and interpretation of 
persuasive messages.
GCOMM 545 Interpersonal Communication:  
Provider-Patient Relationships 
3 credits 
Examines interpersonal communication between persons in various 
health care contexts, with specific focus on theories and research 
in patient-provider communication.
GCOMM 550 Crisis and Risk Communication
3 credits
This course will discuss what constitutes and causes organizational 
crises, how to avoid crises and assess risks, what to do when a crisis 
hits, and how to learn from past crises and prevent future problems. 
Emphasis will be placed on practical application of crisis and risk 
communication theory.
GCOMM 590 Strategic Communication Ethics and Law
3 credits 
A study of the special laws of libel, First Amendment problems, 
free press vs. fair trial, copyright, ethical issues, and regulatory 
provisions that pertain to mass media. Various ethical theories 
are described, analyzed, and interpreted to better understand the 
process of communication.
GCOMM 605 Family Communication: Health and Aging 
3 credits 
Examines family communication as it evolves across one’s 
lifetime. The theory and research focus provides students with 
tools to investigate and appreciate the complexities of family 
communication at different life stages, with specific focus on health 
communication literature.
GCOMM 610 Message Design and Media Production
3 credits
This course examines the application of media production princi-
ples to the development of digital content. A particular emphasis 
is placed on audience analysis and scriptwriting as important effi-
ciencies in all digital production. Students will create audio, video 
and graphics messages. Appropriate message distribution methods 
will be analyzed to determine overall communication strategies.
GCOMM 615 Intercultural Communication
3 credits
Explores cultural, international and global communication as 
essential skills to become informed and effective professional 
communicators. Students research the intersection of health and 
environmental concerns within a global context.
GCOMM 620 Social Media Management
3 credits
This course provides students with an introduction to social media 
as it relates to the history, theories, ethics and practice of communi-
cation. Students will explore a diverse range of social media forms 
including blogs, virtual communities, wikis, mobile, and video and 
photo sharing sites. They will become familiar with social media 
research and analytics programs and understand how social media 
can be used as part of a strategic communication campaign.
GCOMM 625 Communication Campaigns
3 credits
Explores the use of communication campaigns to promote issues 
of public importance. This includes public relations efforts and 
public health topics. The course examines how communication 
campaigns are designed, implemented, and evaluated; and de-
scribes the role of communication theory and research throughout 
the campaign process.
GCOMM 635 Communication Seminar
3 credits
Various topics will be explored in this course depending upon the 
research/teaching focus of faculty and the interest/needs of students.
GCOMM 640 Communication Internship
3 credits
The communication internship provides students with practical, 
real-world experience in the field of communication. During an 
internship, students apply knowledge and skills learned in the 
curriculum in an environment outside the classroom. Students will 
maintain a journal that details their experiences at the internship and 
present a paper and presentation to the Graduate Program Director. 
Students are required to work a minimum of 150 hours to meet the 
credit requirements of the internship.
177
Board of Trustees
Board of Trustees
Mr. Robert P. Barker ‘72
Retired Executive, Parker Aerospace, Dana Point, CA
Ms. Candace D. (Horton) Battles ‘93
Retired Social Worker, Harborcreek Youth Services, Erie, PA
Mr. Richard E. Beattie ‘92
President, Mechanical Engineering & Construction (MEC2), 
Phoenix, MD
Mr. Gerald Blanks ‘90
Chief Executive Officer, Greater Erie Economic Development 
Corporation, Erie, PA
Mr. Walter W. Cooper ‘85, ‘87M
President and CEO, Precision Health Services, St. Petersburg, FL
Ms. Tina M. (Cicchetti) Donikowski ‘85
Retired Vice President, GE Transportation Systems, Erie, PA
Rebecca Erwin-Cohen, Ph.D. ‘90
Technology Transfer Patenting and Licensing Specialist, 
National Center for Advancing Translational Science, 
Hagerstown, MD
President, National Alumni Board
Ms. Dana M. (Kennedy) Fallon ‘91
Career Services Manager, Northern Virginia Community 
College, Annandale,VA
Very Rev. Michael Ferrick, V.F. ‘84
Rector, St. Peter Cathedral Parish, Erie, PA
Mr. Jim Fiorenzo ‘90M
Retired President, UPMC Hamot, Erie, PA and Bonita Springs, FL
Ms. Susan P. Forquer ’66 VMC
Retired Caseworker, Family Services of NWPA Erie, PA
Ms. Gwendolyn M. (Ralph) Garbarino, Esq. ‘82
Vice President and General Counsel, eden, Inc., State College, PA 
Secretary 
Mr. James Grunke
CEO, Erie Regional Chamber and Growth Partnership, Erie, PA
Major General Timothy J. Hilty ‘81
Assistant Adjutant General, Department of the Army/ 
PA National Guard, Lebanon, PA
Rev. Scott W. Jabo, Ph.D.
Rector and Vocational Director, St. Mark Seminary, Erie, PA
Ms. Stacy M. Juchno ‘98
Executive VP and General Auditor,  
PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA
Mr. Scott M. Krall ‘84
Corporate EHS and Senior Remediation Manager, PPG 
Industries, Inc., Pittsburgh, PA
Mr. Pierre McCormick ‘79
Retired President/CEO, Wisconsin Distributors, LP, Erie, PA
Mr. Mark J. Minnaugh ‘81
Retired Executive Vice President, Giant Eagle, Inc., 
Allison Park, PA 
Vice Chairperson
Richard G. Orlando, M.D. ‘76
Retired Director, Cataract Surgery, Columbus Ophthalmology, 
Dublin, OH
The Most Rev. Lawrence T. Persico, J.C.L.
Bishop of the Diocese of Erie, Erie, PA
Chairperson
Kiran K. Rajasenan, M.D. ‘93
Medical Oncologist, UPMC Passavant, Pittsburgh, PA
Rev. Nicholas J. Rouch, S.T.D., ‘83
Vicar General, Diocese of Erie, Erie, PA
Mr. James J. Rutkowski, Jr. ‘83
General Manager/Treasurer, Industrial Sales and 
Manufacturing, Inc., Erie, PA
Rev. Christopher J. Singer ‘99
Chancellor, Diocese of Erie, Erie, PA
Antoinette Spevetz, M.D. ‘83
Professor of Medicine, Cooper Medical School  
of Rowan University, Oxford, PA
Ms. Monica T. (Mangefrida) Trott ‘87, ‘90M
Global Technical Lead/Portfolio Management,  
Google Headquarters, Newark, CA
Ms. Laura Vaccaro ‘89
Chief Executive Officer, Kronkosky Charitable Foundation, 
San Antonio, TX
Ms. Margaret A. (Rothgery) VanderLaan ‘89
Chief Marketing Officer, Encore Electric, Highlands Ranch, CO
Howard Ward, Ph.D.
Retired Associate Vice President of Auxiliary Services, 
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), Rochester, NY
Mark S. Zagorski ‘90
CEO of DoubleVerify, Inc., New York, NY
THE PRESIDENT OF GANNON UNIVERSITY
THE PRESIDENT OF THE FACULTY SENATE
THE PRESIDENT OF THE STUDENT 
GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION
Emeritus Trustee:
DR. SALLY R. SCHULZE – CLEVELAND, OH
178
Administration
Office of the President
Walter Iwanenko, Ph.D.
President
B.S. D’Youville College
M.S. D’Youville College
Ph.D. State University of New York at Buffalo School of 
Medicine
Valerie Bacik
Chief Institutional Planning Officer
B.S. Gannon University
M.B.A. Wake Forest University
Nancy Bird
Vice President for University Advancement
B.S. The Pennsylvania State University
William R. Edmondson
Vice President for Enrollment
B.S. Kent State University
M.P.A. Kent State University
Sarah J. Ewing, Ph.D.
Provost and Vice President for Student Experience
B.S. Penn State Erie, The Behrend College
Ph.D. North Carolina State University
Mark Jordano
Chief Information Officer
B.S. Gannon University
M.B.A. Gannon University
Rev. Michael T. Kesicki
Chaplain
B.S. Gannon University
S.T.B. St. Mary’s Seminary and University
M.Div. St. Mary’s Seminary and University
Jennifer R. Lundy
Vice President for Finance and Campus Operations
B.S. University of Pittsburgh
M.B.A. Chatham University
Cristin D. Neil
Executive Assistant to the President
B.A. DePauw University
Douglas Oathout
Chief of Staff and Director of Marketing and Communications
B.A. State University of New York at Buffalo
Faculty
Ahmed, AbuHussein
Assistant Professor Electrical and Cyber Engineering
B.S. Tafila Technical University , Tafila, Jordan,
MS and Ph.D from University of Memphis Tennessee
Adams, Heather
Associate Professor of Physician Assistant Department
B.S. University of Pittsburgh; MPAS Chatham College
Aggarwal, Mahesh C.
Professor of Mechanical Engineering 
B.S. IIT Kanpur, U.P. India; M.S. Marquette University; 
Ph.D. University of Michigan
Allen Catellier, Jennifer R.
Associate Professor of Communication Arts and Director 
of Strategic Communication and Co-Director of the School 
of Communication and the Arts
B.A. Mercyhurst University; M.A. Edinboro University  
of Pennsylvania; Ph.D. University at Buffalo
Alonge, Shawna
Assistant Professor and Clinical Coordinator  
of Physician Assistant Department
B.S., MPAS Gannon University
Amann, Carol Ann
Assistant Professor of Villa Maria School of Nursing
BSN The Pennsylvania State University, MSN Gannon 
University, PhD Oklahoma City University
Archer, Robin S.
Assistant Professor of Clinical Mental Health Counseling
B.A. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania, M.A. Edinboro 
University of Pennsylvania, Ph.D. Kent State University 
Baughman, Benjamin M. 
Associate Professor and Director of Applied Intelligence 
and Criminalistics
B.S. East Carolina University, M.S. The University of Liverpool, 
Ph.D. University of Huddersfield
Brown, Lisa
Assistant Teaching Professor and Program Director of M.Ed. 
Reading and Reading Specialist
B.S., M.Ed. Edinboro University; Ed.D. Indiana University 
of Pennsylvania 
179
Faculty
Brzuz, Amy
Associate Professor and Program Director of Occupational 
Therapy
B.S. Gannon University; OTD Chatham University
Cavanagh, Kimberly
Associate Professor and Dean, Morosky College  
of Health Professions and Sciences
B.S. Siena College; MPAS University of Nebraska Medical 
Center; D.H.Sc. Nova Southeastern University
Church, Lindsay
Assistant Professor of Occupational Therapy,  
Academic Fieldwork Coordinator
B.S., M.S., PPOTD Gannon University
Clark, Gerald
Associate Professor of Criminal Justice and Criminalistics
B.A. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania 
M.A. C.U.N.Y. John Jay College of Criminal Justice 
Ph.D. Capella University
Cooper, Diann
Assistant Teaching Professor of Nursing
B.S.N. Gannon University; M.S.N. Edinboro University of 
Pennsylvania; Ph.D. Indiana University of Pennsylvania
Corsi, Stephen
Assistant Teaching Professor and Coordinator of Graduate 
Programs, School of Education 
B.S. Indiana University of Pennsylvania; M.M. Duquesne 
University; Advanced Administrative Certifications 
Edinboro University of Pennsylvania
DiTirro, Lindsey J.
Assistant Professor of Communication Arts
B.A. University of Dayton; M.A. University of Dayton; 
Ph.D. Purdue University
Diz, Harry R.
Professor Emeritus of Environmental Science and Engineering
B.A. Duke University; M.A. Northern Arizona University
M.S., Ph.D. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Dong, Yudi
Assistant Professor, Computer and Information Science
B.E. University of Shanghai Science &Technology Shanghai, 
China, M.S. and Ph.D. Stevens Institute of Technology
Forbes, Leighann S.
Associate Professor of Education and Associate Dean for  
Faculty and Development, College of Humanities, Education  
and Social Sciences
B.S., M.Ed. Edinboro University; Ed.D. Duquesne University
Galleher, Carolyn A.
Associate Professor and Program Chair of Physical Therapy
B.S. St. Louis University; 
M.H.S., D.H.S. University of Indianapolis
Gee, David J.
Associate Professor and Chair of Mechanical Engineering 
Director of Mechanical Engineering Graduate Programs
B.S. University of California at Davis; 
M.S., Ph.D. Boston University
Greenthaner, Ashley
Assistant Teaching Professor of Physical Therapy
B.S. University of Pittsburgh;
DPT Youngstown State University
Grippe, Kristen
Associate Professor and Interim Program Director  
of Physician Assistant Department 
B.S., MPAS Gannon University
Gustafson, Beth
Assistant Professor of Physical Therapy
B.S. Quinnipiac College; M.S.Ed. University of Dayton, 
D.H.Sc. University of Indianapolis
Hassanpour, Pezhman
Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. University of Tehran; M.S. Sharif University of 
Technology; Ph.D. University of Toronto
Hawkins-Pokabla, Julia
Associate Professor of Occupational Therapy
B.S. University of Scranton; OTD Chatham University
Hemshrodt, Patricia
Instructor of Nursing
B.S.N. University of Pittsburgh; M.S.N. Duquesne University; 
Ph.D. Gannon University
Hoppe, Blake
Associate Professor and Associate Director  
of Physician Assistant Department
B.S. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania; M.S. (Med Ed),
D.O. Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine
180
Ji, Xiaoxu
Assistant Professor of Biomedical Engineering, 
B.S. Beijing Information Science and Technology University; 
M.S. Lakehead University; Ph.D. Western University
Jubulis, Mark A.
Associate Professor, Political Science Program
Lecturer in the MPA program
B.A. Canisius College; M.A. and Ph.D University of 
Notre Dame
Jung, Yong-Kyu
Associate Professor of Electrical and Cyber Engineering
B.S.E.E. Korea University; M.S.E.E., 
Ph.D. Georgia Institute of Technology
Kalivoda, Celene
Assistant Teaching Professor of Management, Program Director 
of Masters of Business Administration Business Analytics
B.S. Penn State Behrend; M.B.A. Gannon University; 
D.B.A. Liberty University
Kasaraneni, Varun
Assistant Professor of Environmental Science and Management
Ph.D. University of Rhode Island
Kim, Hwidong
Associate Professor of Environmental Science and Management
B.S., M.S. Inha University; Ph.D. University of Florida
Kitts, Suzanne
Associate Professor of Applied Exercise Science; Program 
Director of Nutrition and Human Performance
B.S. The Pennsylvania State University; M.A. Edinboro 
University of Pennsylvania; Ph.D. Walden University
Konzel, James
Visiting Instructor, Business Administration 
B.S., Penn State University; M.S., Boston University; 
MBA, University of Notre Dame
Kubiak, Stephanie
Assistant Professor of Occupational Therapy
B.A. Ohio State University; M.S. Gannon University;  
Ph.D. Nova Southeastern University 
Kuvshinikov, Joseph
Associate Professor of Management
B.S. Pennsylvania State University; M.B.A. Pennsylvania State 
University; Ph.D. Gannon University
LaPaglia, Kyle
Assistant Professor of School of Education
B.S. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania; M.S. Western 
Governors University; Ed.D. Florida Gulf Coast University
Lasky-McFarlin, Chelsea
Assistant Teaching Professor of Physical Therapy
B.A. Case Western Reserve University; DPT Boston University
Lavery, Nicole
Associate Professor of Occupational Therapy
B.S., M.S. Gannon University; OTD Chatham University
Lee, Wookwon
Professor and Chairperson of Electrical and Cyber Engineering, 
Director of Graduate Electrical Engineering and Embedded 
Software Engineering Programs
B.S. Inha University, Korea; M.S., 
D.Sc. The George Washington University
Legters, Kristine S.
Professor of Physical Therapy; Associate Dean, Morosky 
College of Health Professions and Sciences 
B.A. Northwestern College; B.S. State University of New York/
Upstate Medical Center; M.S. Gannon University; 
DSc Rocky Mountain University of Health Professions
LeVan, David
Professor of Occupational Therapy
B.S., M.Ed. Gannon University; DHSc University of 
Indianapolis
Lewis, Constance
Assistant Teaching Professor and Co-Director  
of Clinical Education of Physical Therapy
B.S. Cornell University: DPT University of Pittsburgh
Lewis, Nicole
Assistant Teaching Professor and Clinical Coordinator 
of Education in Speech-Language Pathology
B.S. SUNY Geneseo; M.S. Ithaca College
Liu, Yunkai
Professor of Computer and Information Science
B.S., M.S. University of Science and Technology (China); M.S. 
University of Illinois at Chicago; Ph.D. West Virginia University
MacPhedran, Kate
Associate Professor of Physical Therapy 
B.S., MPT Gannon University; 
Ph.D. Western Michigan University
181
Faculty
Magno, Christopher N.
Associate Professor of Criminal Justice and Criminalistics 
B.S. Philippine Normal University; M.A. University of the 
Philippines; Ph.D. Indian University Bloomington
Majewski, Jennifer D.
Associate Teaching Professor of Physician Assistant Department
B.S. Grove City College; M.S.P.A.S. Arcadia University
Mak, Fong-Kiong
Professor of Electrical and Cyber Engineering
B.S. West Virginia University; M.S., Ph.D. University of Illinois
Malarvizhi, Priyan K.
Assistant Visiting Professor, Computer and Information Science
B.S., M.S., Ph.D., at VIT University, India 
Matovu, Richard
Assistant Professor of Cybersecurity
Computer and Information Science
B.S., M.S. Makerere University; Ph.D. Texas Tech University
Maurer, Joshua
Lecturer in Business Administration
B.S., Winona State University; MBA, University of Wisconsin; 
Ph.D., Washington State University
Mecca, Amber
Instructor of Villa Maria School of Nursing
BSN and BA Waynesburg University, MSN/CRNP Gannon 
University, DNP Gannon University
Merritt, Jill
Associate Professor of Education
B.S. Edinboro University; M.Ed. Youngstown State University; 
Ph.D. Capella University
Michael, Robert
Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. University of Akron; M.S., 
Ph.D. Case Western Reserve University
Mokris, Rebecca
Associate Professor and Program Director  
Master of Athletic Training Program
B.S. Indiana University; M.S. West Virginia University;
M.S. California University of Pennsylvania; D.Ed. Indiana 
University of Pennsylvania
Mosinski, John David
Associate Professor of Applied Exercise Science, Program 
Director of Sport and Exercise Science Graduate Program
B.S. Gannon University; M.S. West Virginia University,  
Ph.D. Case Western Reserve University
Oden, Pensiri Nuk
Assistant Professor of Clinical Mental Health Counseling
B.A. Houghton College
M.A. Indiana Wesleyan University
Ph.D. Regent University
Ohu, Ikechukwu P.
Associate Professor of Industrial and Robotics Engineering
B.Eng. Ambrose Alli University; M.S. Southern Illinois 
University; Ph.D. Southern Illinois University
Osatuyi, Temidayo
Visiting Instructor, Business Administration 
B.S., Kogi State University; MBA, The University of  
Texas Rio Grande Valley 
Panza, Michael J.
Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.M.E., M.S. Gannon University; 
Ph.D. State University of New York at Buffalo
Camera Peterson, Natasha
Assistant Teaching Professor and Director of Clinical Education 
of Physician Assistant Department
B.S., MPAS Gannon University
Piovesan, Davide
Professor and Chairperson of Biomedical, 
Industrial, and Systems Engineering Department
M.S., Ph.D. University of Padua
Probst, Karen
Assistant Professor of Occupational Therapy  
B.S., M.S., OTD Gannon University
Quinn, Lisa
Associate Professor and Associate Director of Villa 
Maria School of Nursing, Advisor of the Family Nurse 
Practitioner Program
B.S.N. Villa Maria College; M.S.N. Edinboro University of 
Pennsylvania; Ph.D. Kent State University
MCHS University of Washington
Rahman, Md Tajmilur 
Assistant Professor of Computer and Information Science
B.S. Northern University; M.S., Ph.D. Concordia University
182
Roberts, John 
B.S. James Madison University; M.S.Ed. Old Dominion 
University; Ed.D, University of Louisiana, Monroe
Roca, Courtney
Assistant Professor, Co-Director of Clinical Education 
in Physical Therapy and Associate Program Director 
B.S., DPT Marymount University; Ed.D. University of 
New England
Sahay, Anjali
Associate Professor, Political Science Program Lecturer  
in the MPA program and Director of the School of Public 
Service and Global Affairs
B.A. Gargi College, India; M.A. Delhi University, India
MBA, Gannon University; Ph.D. Old Dominion University
Scully, Shannon
Instructor of Nursing
B.S.N. Gannon University; M.S.N. Duquesne University;  
D.N.P. Gannon University
Searing, Lisabeth
Assistant Professor of Villa Maria School of Nursing
B.S.N. Case Western; M.S. University of Illinois at Chicago; 
Ph.D. University of Illinois at Chicago
Shuss, Erin
Assistant Professor of Athletic Training
B.A. Baldwin Wallace University; M.H.S. University of 
St. Augustine for Health Sciences; EdD, University of 
St. Augustine for Health Sciences
Skelly, Donna
Associate Professor of Physical Therapy
B.S., M.S. University of Pittsburgh; 
Ph.D. Nova Southeastern University
Snarski, Kristen
Associate  Professor of Physical Therapy
B.S., P.T. Ithaca College; M.H.S. University of Indianapolis; 
Ph.D. Rocky Mountain University of Health Professions
Snyder, Brenda
Assistant Teaching Professor 
Villa Maria School of Nursing, BSN, MSN York College of 
Pennsylvania, DNP Frances Payne Bolton School of Nursing, 
Case Western Reserve University
Stachel, Richard D.
Assistant Professor of Healthcare Administration  
Director of Masters in Healthcare Administration  
and Online Master of Business Administration 
B.A. Duquesne University; M.B.A. Point Park University;  
D.Sc. Robert Morris University
Starns, Mackenzie
Assistant Professor and Clinical Coordinator 
of Physician Assistant Department
B.S. Baldwin Wallace College; MHS Drexel University
Stauffer, Kory
Professor of Applied Exercise Science
B.S. Ursinus College; M.S. University of Pittsburgh;  
Ph.D. University of Pittsburgh
Steinbrink, Scott
Associate Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. University of Colorado; M.S. Auburn University; 
Ph.D. Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
Sundaram, Ramakrishnan
Professor of Electrical and Cyber Engineering
B.S. Indian Institute of Technology, India; M.S. Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology; Ph.D. Purdue University
Taheri, Shayan
Assistant Professor of Electrical and Cyber Engineering
B.S. Shahid Beheshti University, Iran; M.S. Utah State 
University; Ph.D. University of Central Florida
Tang, Mei-Huei
Professor of Computer and Information Science
B. A. National Cheng Chi University; 
M.S., Ph.D. State University of New York, University at Albany
Taylor, Wallace
Visiting Assistant Professor, Business Administration 
B.S., Georgia State University; MBA, Troy State University; 
M.S., University of Georgia; DBA, Georgia State University
Tiari, Saeed
Associate Professor of Biomedical Engineering
B.S. University of Tehran, M.S. Amirkabir University 
of Technology, Ph.D. Temple University
Torab, Hamid
Professor of Mechanical Engineering 
B.S. University of Tehran; M.S., Ph.D. University of Michigan
183
Faculty
Tweneboah-Koduah, Samuel
Visiting Assistant Professor Computer and Information Science 
B.S. University of Science and Technology, 
M.S. University of Westminister, Ph.D. Aarhus University
Ullah, Habib
Visiting Assistant Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology 
M.S. North Dakota State University
Ph.D. North Dakota State University
Ulrich, Jonathan
Assistant Teaching Professor of Physical Therapy
B.S., M.S. Northeastern University; DPT Shenandoah University
Ph.D. Gannon University
Vernaza, Karinna M.
Professor of Mechanical Engineering
B.S. United States Merchant Marine Academy; 
M.S., Ph.D. University of Notre Dame
Wei, Xiangjing (Emma)
Assistant Professor of Risk Management and Insurance
B.S. University of International Business and Economics; 
M.S. Graduate School of People’s Bank of China; 
M.A. Georgia State University; Ph.D. Georgia State University
Willow, Jason P.
Assistant Professor of Applied Exercise Science
B.A. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania; M.S. Miami 
University; Ph.D. The Pennsylvania State University
Willow, Rebecca A.
Associate Professor and Program Director 
of Clinical Mental Health Counseling
B.A. Allegheny College; M.A. Bowling Green State University; 
M.A. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania; 
Ed.D. Duquesne University
Windyga, Piotr
Assistant Visiting Professor, Computer and Information Science, 
B.S., University of Los Andes, M.S. Simon Bolivar University, 
Ph.D., University of Rennes 1
Yang, (David) Yang
Assistant Professor of Finance
B.B.A., St. Louis University; MSc., University of  
Lancaster, UK; M.A., University of South Florida;  
Ph.D., West Virginia University
Yeshion, Theodore E.
Professor of Criminal Justice and Criminalistics
Director of Master of Science in Criminalistics program
B.S. York College of the City University of New York; 
M.S. The George Washington University; 
Ph.D. State University of New York at Buffalo
Zhang, Mengzhong
Professor of Public Administration and Program Director of 
Master of Public Administration program.
B.S., Lanzhou University, China; Master of Law, 
Renmin University of China, China; 
Ph.D. Rutgers University-Newark
Zhao, Lin
Professor of Electrical and Cyber Engineering
B.S., M.Sc. Shandong University, China; 
Ph.D. University of Western Ontario, Canada
184
Adjunct Faculty
Arant, Rosemary
Lecturer in Business Administration 
B.S. Ohio State University; M.B.A. Indiana Wesleyan University
Beiter, Michael
Lecturer in Computer and Information Science
B.A. The Pennsylvania State University
Bova, Michael
Lecturer in Industrial Safety 
B.S. Indiana University of Pennsylvania; M.B.A. University 
of Hartford; Certified Safety Professional (CSP); Certified 
Insurance Counselor (CIC); Associate in Risk Management 
(ARM)
Bratton, Adam C.
Lecturer in the MPA program
MPA, George Mason University
Bulmer, Jean
Lecturer in Nursing
B.S.N. University of Pennsylvania; M.S.N. University of 
Pennsylvania; D.N.P. Case Western Reserve University
Caputo, James
Assistant Professor of Nursing, 
Physician Assistant and Athletic Training
B.S. The Pennsylvania State University; B.S. University of 
Pittsburgh; Pharm D. University of Pittsburgh
Chrostowski, Maura
Lecturer in Healthcare Administration
B.S. Gannon University; MHA Gannon University
Coffman, John
Lecturer in Computer and Information Science
B.A. Duquesne University; M.Ed. Gannon University
Comstock, Thomas G.
Lecture in Public Administration
B.B.A. St. Bonaventure University, M.B.A. The Pennsylvania 
State University
Coppock, Timothy E.
Lecturer in Clinical Mental Health Counseling 
B.A. Earlham College
M. Div. United Theological Seminary
M.A. Bowling Green State University
Ph.D. The University of Toledo
Courts, Bari
Lecturer in Healthcare Administration
B.A. Kenyon College; M.S. University of the Cumberlands;  
M.A. University of Arizona; MBA University of Cincinnati; 
Ph.D. Capella University 
Cypher, Amanda M.
Lecturer in the Public Administration program
B.S. Gannon University
M.B.A. Gannon University
DiPlacido, Allison
Lecturer in Nursing
B.S.N. Gannon University; M.S.N. University of Pittsburgh; 
D.N.P. University of Pittsburgh
Dohar, John 
Lecturer in Healthcare Administration
B.S. Youngstown State University; M.A. Youngstown 
State University
Fulgenzio, Gina
Lecturer in Physician Assistant Department
B.S. Gannon University; MPAS Gannon University
Gao, Xin
Lecturer in Electrical and Cyber Engineering
B.S. Jilin University, China; M.S. Lakehead University, Canada; 
Ph.D. Western University, Canada
Gavacs, Mary
Assistant Professor in Occupational Therapy
B.S. SUNY Buffalo; M.Ed. Penn State University
Gerow, Laura
Lecturer in Business Administration
B.A. Mercyhurst University; MS Mercyhurst University; 
Ph.D. Gannon University
Goode, Sharon
Lecturer in Healthcare Administration
B.S. Edinboro University; MHSA Lake Erie College 
of Osteopathic Medicine
Goodrich, Megan
Lecturer in Athletic Training
M.S. North Carolina University; B.S. Mercyhurst University 
Gruber, Paulina
Lecturer in Athletic Training
MSAT Daemen College; BS St. Bonaventure University
185
Adjunct Faculty
Hawley, John W.
Lecturer in Pharmacology
B.S., Pharm.D. University of Arkansas
Heaney, Jill
Lecturer in Business Administration
B.S. M.S. Duquesne University; DBA Argosy University
Hewitt, Jason
Lecturer in Healthcare Administration
B.B.A St Bonaventure University; MBA Gannon University; 
Ph.D. Gannon University
Hinckley, Tom L.
Lecturer in Electrical and Cyber Engineering
B.S. Gannon University; M.S. Ohio University
Hoch, David
Lecturer in Environmental Science and Management
A.B. Haverford College; M.P.H., Ph.D. Cambridge University
Hudson, Joseph
Lecturer in Environmental Science and Management
B.S., M.S. Gannon University
Iwanenko, Mary
Assistant Professor, Occupational Therapy Program
B.S., M.S. D’Youville College; PP-OTD Gannon University
Jageman, John
Medical Director of Physician Assistant Program
M.D. Temple University
Jane, Courtney
Lecturer in Business Administration 
B.A. University of California, M. Ed. Western Governors 
University; MBA Dartmouth College; DBA Argosy University
Kennedy, Thomas
Lecturer of Engineering
B.S. State University of New York; 
M.B.A. The Pennsylvania State University
Leinfuss, Janis
Assistant Professor in Post Professional  
Occupational Therapy Doctorate Program
B.S. Quinnipiac University; M.S. Bloomsburg University of PA; 
PPOTD Gannon University
Linkie, Christine
Assistant Professor in Occupational Therapy
B.S. Colgate University; M.S. Colombia University; 
PhD Texas Woman’s University
Madura, Allen
Lecturer in Biomedical Engineering 
B.S. Gannon University
McDade, Mary
Lecturer in Strategic Communication
B.S. The Pennsylvania State University; M.S. Edinboro 
University of Pennsylvania; Ph.D. Kent State University
Miller, John M.
Lecturer in Computer and Information Science
B.S. Dickenson College; M.S. The American University, 
C.P.M.P., C.P.M.I. 
Moser, Daniel A.
Lecturer in Electrical and Computer Engineering
B.S.E.E. Gannon University; M.Sc. Florida Institute 
of Technology
Mukina Felker, Linda J.
Lecturer in Strategic Communication
B.S. Edinboro University; M.Ed. Slippery Rock University, 
Ph.D. The Pennsylvania State University
Nick, Daniel
Lecturer in Healthcare Administration
B.A. Gannon University; M.S. University of Nevada, Las Vegas 
Nye, Rachel
Lecturer in Physician Assistant
B.S. Gannon University; MPAS Gannon University
Onest, Amy
Lecturer in Public Administration
B.A. Gettysburg College; 
M.B.A. The Pennsylvania State University
Pacansky, Allison
Lecturer in Physician Assistant Department
B.S. Gannon University; MPAS Gannon University
Pora, Deborah
Lecturer in Nursing
B.S.N. Pennsylvania State University; M.S.N. Kent State 
University; D.N.P. Edinboro University
Porcello, Dorothy
Instructor in Occupational Therapy
B.S. Mississippi State University; M.S. Washington University; 
OTD Gannon University
186
Price, Todd 
Lecturer in Business Administration & Healthcare 
Administration 
B.A., Central Michigan University; M.S. and MBA, Eastern 
Illinois University; Ph.D., Walden University 
Reddy, Suresh B.
Lecturer in Engineering
B.S. Indian Institute of Technology; M.S. Ohio State; 
Ph.D. Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Rizzuto, Aime
Assistant professor in Post professional  
Occupational Therapy Doctorate Program
B.S., M.S D’Youville College; PPOTD Gannon University
Roberts, Kathleen
Lecturer, Athletic Training
M.S., Concordia University; B.S. West Virginia University
Rodgers, Robert J.
Lecturer in Electrical and Cyber Engineering
B.S. Gannon University; M.S. Drexel University 
Roeback, Jason
Lecturer in Healthcare Administration
B.H.S. University of Kentucky; M.H.A. Penn State University
Schultz, Emily
Lecturer in Physician Assistant Department
B.S. University of Pittsburgh; B.S. Gannon University; 
MPAS Gannon University
Scott, Brian
Lecturer in Computer and Information Science
B.A. The Pennsylvania State University; 
M.C.I.S. Gannon University
Shah, Robin
Lecturer in Business Administration
BS, Arizona State University
MBA, DeVry University
Ph.D., Northcentral University
Sterrett, Sheila Fitzgerald
Lecturer in the Public Administration program
B.S. Clarion University of Pennsylvania
M.P.A., Gannon University
Taylor, Mary Jean
Lecturer in Physical Therapy
M.A. New York University;
Ph.D. Rocky Mountain University of Health Professions
Trucilla, John
Lecturer in Criminalistics 
B.A. University of Dayton; 
J.D. University of Dayton School of Law
VanderPal, Geoffrey
Lecturer in Business Administration
B.S. Columbia College; MBA Webster University; 
DBA Nova Southeastern
Vinesky, Kaleigh
Lecturer in Physician Assistant
B.S. Mercyhurst University; B.A. Mercyhurst University; 
MSPAS Daemen College
Wade, Keith
Lecturer in Business Administration
BS, Oakland University
MBA, University of Detroit Mercy
DBA, Argosy University 
Wang, Xiaozhong
B.A., M.S. Tsinghua University, Beijing; 
Ph.D. University of Maryland
Weissberg, Kathleen
Assistant Professor in Post Professional Occupational 
Therapy Doctorate Program
M.S. D’Youville College; OTD Chatham University
Wolf, Erin
Instructor in Occupational Therapy
B.S. Gannon University; M.S. Gannon University
Wolford, Matthew L.
Lecturer in Environmental Science and Management
B.A. Pennsylvania University; 
J.D. Temple University School of Law
Yancosek, Kathleen
Assistant Professor in Post Professional Occupational 
Therapy Doctorate Program
B.S. Gannon University; M.S. Eastern Kentucky University; 
PhD University of Kentucky
187
Adjunct Faculty
Adjunct Faculty – 
Education 
Beardsley, Greg
Clinical Supervisor, School of Education
B.S., M.Ed., and Advanced Administrative Certifications 
Edinboro University
Blozowich, David
Lecturer in Education Online C/I Program
B.S., M.Ed. Clarion University of Pennsylvania; Advanced 
Administrative Certifications Pennsylvania State University;  
Ed. D. Immaculata University
Bubb, Esther
Lecturer in Education Online C/I Program
B.S. Cheyney University; MBA University of Phoenix; M.S. 
St. Joseph University; Ed.D. Walden University; Advanced 
Administrative Certification Gannon University
Burkey, Jessica
Lecturer in Education Online C/I Program
B.S. Indiana University of Pennsylvania; M.Ed. Edinboro 
University of Pennsylvania
Campbell, Michele
Lecturer in Education Online C/I Program and Educational 
Leadership Online Program
B.B. Lake Erie College for Women; M.S. Gannon University; 
Advanced Administrative Certifications St. Bonaventure; 
Psy.D. Indiana University of Pennsylvania
Costello, Christina 
Lecturer in Education Online C/I Program
B.S. Gannon University; M.Ed. and Advanced Administrative 
Certification Gannon University; M.Ed. and Advanced 
Administrative Certification Edinboro University 
Emmanuele, Nicholas
Lecturer in Education Online Reading and ESL Programs 
B.S., M.A., and Advanced Certification, Gannon University
Graduate certificates, East Carolina University 
and Edinboro University
M.Ed., Penn State World Campus
Fonzo, Erin
Lecturer in Education Online/C/I Program
B.S. Clarion University; M.Ed. Slippery Rock University;
M.Ed. Gannon University; Advanced Administrative 
Certification Gannon University
Granahan, Sarah 
Lecturer in Education ESL Program
B.S. The Pennsylvania State University
Hess, Kelly
Lecturer in Advanced Leadership Online Program
B.S., M.Ed., Advanced Graduate Studies in Administration, 
Reading Specialist Certification Edinboro University
Superintendent Letter of Eligibility Gannon University
Holliday, Melinda
Lecturer in Education Online Reading and ESL Programs
B.S. Indiana University of Pennsylvania; 
M.A. Gannon University
Hoyt, Christina
Clinical Supervisor, School of Education
B.S. University of Pittsburgh
M.Ed. and Advanced Administrative Certification Edinboro 
University
Johnson, Ann
Lecturer in Education Online C/I and Online Reading Programs 
B.A. John Carroll University; M.S. Walden University
Kessler, Larry
Lecturer in Leadership Online Program 
B.S., M.A. and Advanced Administrative Certification 
Edinboro University; Advanced Administrative Certification 
Westminster College
Lane, Matthew
Lecturer in Advanced Leadership Online Program
B.S. University of Dayton; M.A. Gannon University; M. Ed. 
Wilkes University; Ed.D. University of Pittsburgh
Mennow, Daniel
Lecturer in Advanced Leadership Online Program
B.A., M.A. Gannon University
M.Ed. and Advanced Administrative Certifications  
Edinboro University
Miller, Donna
Lecturer in Advanced Leadership Online Program
A.S. University of New Hampshire
B.S., M.S. and Advanced Administrative Certifications 
Edinboro University
Neely, Heidi
Lecturer in Education Online C/I Program
B.A. Thiel College; M.Ed. and Advanced Administrative 
Certification Gannon University
188
Reynolds, Carrie
Lecturer in M. Ed. in Reading/Reading Specialist 
Certification Program
B.S. Indiana University of Pennsylvania; M. Ed. Edinboro 
University of Pennsylvania
Rhodes, Chelsey
Lecturer in Education Online C/I Program
B.A. Mercyhurst University; M.Ed. Gannon University
Rios, Dominic
ASL Instructor, School of Education
B.S. University of Pittsburgh
Schrall, Roberta
Lecturer in Educational Leadership Online Programs
B.S., M.Ed, and Advanced Certifications Edinboro University 
of Pennsylvania; Ed.D. Youngstown State University
Seth, Bridget
Lecturer in Education Online M.Ed. Program
B.A. Mercyhurst University: M.Ed. Gannon University
Shaffer, Joy
Lecturer in Education Online M.Ed. and STEM
B.S., M.Ed. Indiana University of Pennsylvania
Principal Certification Point Park University
Sins, Catrina
ASL Instructional, School of Education
B.A. North Central Bible College
Stark, Donald
Lecturer in Educational Leadership Online Program
B.A. Lycoming College; M.Ed. Edinboro University; 
Advanced Administrative Certifications Edinboro University
Timer, Kimberly
Lecturer in Education Online C/I Program  
and Educational Leadership Online Program
Lecturer in the MPA Program
B.A. Denison University; MBA and J.D. University of Akron
M.Ed. Gannon University
Valkenburg, Nicole
Lecturer in Education Online M.Ed. and STEM
B.S. University of Scranton
M.S. Walden University
Wilson Certificate Fitchburg State University
STEM Endorsement Wilkes University
Supervisory Certificate Gannon University
Watson, Aileen
Lecturer in Education Online Reading Program
B.S. The Pennsylvania State University; 
M.Ed. Gannon University
Weaver, Joshua
Lecturer in Advanced Leadership Online Program
B.A., M.Ed., Principal Certification Slippery Rock University
Superintendent Letter of Eligibility Westminster College
Ed. D Capella University
Whitman, Bradley
Lecturer in Educational Leadership Online Program
B.S., M.Ed. Gannon University; Advanced Administrative 
Certification Edinboro University
Zimmerman, Kelly 
B.S. Duquesne University
M.Ed. Edinboro University
Advanced Administrative Certification Gannon University
Zona, Justin
Lecturer in Education Online C/I Program and Educational 
Leadership Online Program
B.S., M.Ed., and Advanced Administrative Certifications 
Gannon University, Advanced Administrative Certification and 
Ed. D Duquesne University
189
Adjunct Faculty
Adjunct Faculty – 
Nurse Anesthesia
Adamczyk, Thomas
Clinical Instructor
B.S. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania; C.C.P. Mississippi 
School of Perfusion Technology 
Albert, J. David 
Professor of Nursing; Chief, Division of Anesthesia
B.S. Gannon University; M.D. University of Pittsburgh
Arkwright, Autumn
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania, M.S.N. Gannon 
University, C.R.N.A UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Bernstein, Eric
Assistant Professor of Nursing
B.S. Emory University; 
M.D. Drexel University College of Medicine
Bindeman, Kathleen
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Gannon University; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Britton, Emily R.
Didactic Faculty
PharmD. University of Toledo College of Pharmacy
Carney, John
Associate Professor of Nursing
M.P.H. Yale University, M.D. Drexel University 
College of Medicine
Coleman, Nefretiri
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Ohio University; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Constable, Joshua
Associate Professor of Nursing
B.S. East Carolina University; 
D.O. Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine
Cornfield, Freda
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. St. Mary’s of the Plains; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia 
Dilla, Lizabeth
Assistant Professor of Nursing
R.N. Cuyahoga Community College; B.S. Edinboro University 
of Pennsylvania; M.S.N. Gannon University;
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Divell, Eric
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Indiana University of Pennsylvania; M.S.N Gannon 
University; C.R.N.A UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia 
Dorris, Paula
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Boston University; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia 
Downing, Therese
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N Graceland College; M.S.N Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia 
Dragoone, Nicole
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N., M.S.N Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia 
Firster, Shaun
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N., M.S.N Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia 
Folga, Shannon
Clinical Instructor
BS Gannon University MSN Gannon University,
C.R.N.A UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Fuller, Katelyn
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N.Edinboro University; M.S.N Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia 
Ganz, Lisa Rhode
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania; M.S.N. Edinboro 
University; C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Hense, Marilyn B. 
Clinical Instructor
R.N. Philipsburg State General Hospital, School of Nursing; 
B.S.N. Carlow College; C.R.N.A. Westmoreland-Latrobe 
Hospitals, School of Anesthesia; M.S. Carlow College
190
Hoge, Brad 
Clinical Instructor
BSN Penn State University MSN Gannon University, 
C.R.N.A UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Kimmy, Alyssa
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N, M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Kinkoph II, Robert 
Clinical Instructor
B.A. The College of Wooster; 
M.D. Wright University School of Medicine
LaJohn, Stephanie
Clinical Instructor
BSN Gannon University, 
C.R.N.A Hamot School of Anesthesia
Larmon, Donald
Associate Professor of Nursing, Program Director, 
B.S.N. Edinboro University, C.R.N.A. Hamot School of 
Anesthesia; M.S.N., D.N.P. Gannon University 
Larson, Christopher 
Clinical Instructor
DMD University of Pittsburgh; MD University of Pittsburgh
Mackenzie, Michele
Didactic Faculty
B.S.N. Gannon University; M.S.N. Gannon University; D.N.P. 
Gannon University; C.R.N.A. Hamot School of Anesthesia
Malarkey IV, Henry 
Clinical Instructor
BS Bucknell University MD, SUNY HSC at Syracuse
Maldonado, Michael
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Edinboro University; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Markiewicz, Mindy
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Edinboro University; M.S.N. Gannon University, 
C.R.N.A. Hamot School of Anesthesia
Marshall, Anthony Scott
Clinical Instructor
B.S. West Virginia Wesleyan College;
D.O. West Virginia School of Osteopathic Medicine
Meade, Carolyn
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Pennsylvania State University; M.S.N Gannon 
University; UPMC C.R.N.A. Hamot School of Anesthesia 
Metzenbacher, Brad
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Edinboro University; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Moritz, Jay C.
Didactic Instructor
B.S. Michigan State University; DPM Temple University 
School of Podiatric Medicine
Mosa, Michael
Clinical Instructor
M.B., ChB Faculty of Medicine Alexandria University
Mosier, Stephen
Associate Professor
B.A. California State University at Sonoma; 
M.D. State University of New York, Brooklyn
Myers, Timothy
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Edinboro University; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. Hamot School of Anesthesia
Novak, Kevin
Clinical Instructor
B.A. Carleton College; M.D. University of Minnesota
Perry, John 
Clinical Instructor
BS Millsaps College;MD University of MS School of Medicine
Persinger, C. Kent
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Edinboro University; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. Hamot School of Anesthesia
Peters, Michelle
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Pennsylvania State University; M.S.N. Gannon 
University; C.R.N.A. Hamot School of Anesthesia
Pike, Beth
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Pennsylvania State University; M.S.N. Gannon 
University; C.R.N.A UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
191
Adjunct Faculty
Rahill, Megan
Clinical Instructor
BSN Duquesne University MSN Gannon University,
C.R.N.A UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Rupp, Jerome
Clinical Coordinator 
B.S.N., M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. Hamot School of Anesthesia
Salisbury, Jennifer
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Pennsylvania State University; M.S.N. Gannon 
University; C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Schell, Paula J.
Clinical Faculty
B.S.N. Slippery Rock University; M.S.N. Edinboro University; 
C.R.N.A. Hamot School of Anesthesia
Sciamanda, Nicholas
Clinical Instructor
BSN University of Akron MSN Gannon University,
C.R.N.A UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Shulkosky, Mark
Clinical Instructor
B.S. University of Pittsburgh; M.D. Temple University
Simanowski, Kathy A.
Clinical Faculty
R.N. Saint Vincent School of Nursing; M.S.N. Gannon 
University; C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Simko, Aundrea
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. University of South Carolina; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Spector, Amanda
Clinical Instructor
B.S., D.O. Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine
Steiner, Tara
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania; M.S.N. Gannon 
University; C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Stevens, Scott
Associate Professor of Nursing 
B.S. University of Southern California San Diego; 
D.O. Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine 
Stevens, William
Clinical Instructor
B.S. University of Miami; M.S. Thomas Jefferson University; 
D.O. Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine 
Storer, Kathleen
Clinical Faculty
B.S.N. Edinboro University; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Stubenhofer, Susie
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N., M.S.N Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia 
Sykola, Cassidy
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Jacksonville University; M.S.N Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Sykola, Emily
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N Edinboro University; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Taylor, Scott
Assistant Professor of Nursing
B.S. Central Michigan University; 
M.D. Wayne State University School of Medicine
Trayer, Joshua
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania; M.S.N. Gannon 
University; C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Troutman, Jeffrey
Associate Professor of Nursing
B.S. John Carroll University; 
D.O. Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine
Tuttle, Jacob
Clinical Instructor
BSN Indiana University of Pennsylvania MSN Gannon 
University, C.R.N.A UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
VanHove, Shawn
Clinical Instructor
B.S. Ohio State University; M.D. Medical College of Ohio
Veith, Cathleen
Clinical Instructor
B.S. Pharmacy, Medical College of Virginia; 
D.O. Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine
192
Wildauer, Eric
Clinical Instructor
B.S. Pennsylvania State University; 
D.O. A.T. Still University of Osteopathic Medicine
Wolfe, Rachel 
Associate Professor of Nursing, Assistant Program Director
B.S.N. California University of Pennsylvania;
M.S.N. University of Pittsburgh; D.N.P. Gannon University
Worley, Diane
Clinical Instructor
B.S.N. Edinboro University of Pennsylvania; M.S.N. Gannon 
University; C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
Yearwood, Sarah
Clinical Instructor
B.S. N. Kent State University; M.S.N. Gannon University; 
C.R.N.A. UPMC Hamot School of Anesthesia
193
Index
Index
Academic Computing.................................................................25
Academic Integrity Policy..........................................................18
Academic Regulations................................................................18
Accreditation.................................................................................2
Administration..........................................................................178
Admission.....................................................................................7
Anti-Money Laundering.............................................................26
Applied Exercise Science...........................................................27
Assistantships..............................................................................13
Athletic Training.........................................................................31
Auditing......................................................................................17
Biomedical Engineering..............................................................39
Board of Trustees......................................................................177
Business Administration ............................................................42
Career Exploration and Development.........................................13
Certificates....................................................................................6 
Changing Graduate Programs.....................................................16
Class Attendance.........................................................................13
Clinical Mental Health Counseling.............................................52
Computer and Information Science............................................56
Concurrent Graduate Degrees.....................................................16
Criminalistics..............................................................................67
Dismissal.....................................................................................14
Doctoral Programs........................................................................6
Education....................................................................................70
Electrical Engineering.................................................................87
Embedded Software Engineering...............................................87
Engineering Management...........................................................97
English Language Requirements (TOEFL)..................................8
Environmental Science and Management.................................105
Faculty......................................................................................178
Federal Direct Student Loan (FDSL)..........................................11
Financial Aid...............................................................................11
Global Students.............................................................................8
Grade Point Average Computation.............................................14
Grading System...........................................................................13
Graduate Student Designations.....................................................7
Graduation ..................................................................................18
Healthcare Administration........................................................110
Incomplete Grades......................................................................14
Information Assurance and Cybersecurity................................115
Interruption of Study...................................................................17
Library.........................................................................................24
Master’s Degree Programs............................................................6
Mechanical Engineering.............................................................99
Medical Leave.............................................................................22
Mission Statement.........................................................................1
Nursing......................................................................................126
Nursing (BSN-DNP) Anesthesia...............................................126
Nursing DNP.............................................................................131
Occupational Therapy...............................................................133
Occupational Therapy Doctorate..............................................140
Online Student Services..............................................................10
Payment......................................................................................11
Physical Therapy ......................................................................143
Physician Assistant...................................................................153
Programs of Study........................................................................6
Public Administration...............................................................159
Repeat Courses............................................................................17
Scheduling..................................................................................13
Second Master’s Degrees............................................................17
Speech-Language Pathology.....................................................163
Standardized Admissions Tests.....................................................7
Statute of Limitations..................................................................14
Strategic Communication..........................................................174
Student Services..........................................................................24
Transcript Policy.........................................................................22
Transfer of Credits......................................................................16
Tuition and Fees..........................................................................10
Withdrawal..................................................................................22
194
109 University Square
Erie, Pennsylvania 16541
www.gannon.edu
